The first chapter
The book I am now sitting down to write must seem pointless to many - if I even dare to imagine that "many" get to read it - because I quite by myself, without anyone's order, start such a work and even myself am not really clear about what the intention is. I want and have to, that's all. More and more inexorably, one asks for the intention and the planning in what is done and said, so that ideally not a word should fall by the wayside - it is only the author of this book who has been forced to go the opposite way, into the aimless. For though my years here as prisoner and chemist - they must be over twenty, I think - have been full enough of work and haste, there must be something that doesn't think it's enough and that has led and overseen another work within me, one that I myself had no opportunity to oversee and where I have still been deeply and almost painfully interested. That work will be finished, once I have written down my book. So I realize how absurd my writings must seem in front of all rational and practical thinking, but I still write.
Maybe I wouldn't have dared to do it before. Maybe it's even the captivity that has made me frivolous. My living conditions now differ insignificantly from those I lived under as a free man. The food turned out to be barely perceptibly worse here - you got used to that. The mattress turned out to be somewhat harder than my bed at home in Kemistaden no. 4 - you got used to that. I rarely got out into the open air any more - you got used to that too. Worst was the divorce from my wife and children, especially as I knew nothing and do not know anything about their fate; it made my first years of captivity full of worry and anxiety. But as time went on, I started to feel calmer than before and even enjoy my existence more and more. Here I had nothing to be anxious about. I had neither subordinates nor bosses - except for the prison guards, who rarely interfered with my work and were only concerned that I followed the rules of order. I had neither patrons nor fellow competitors. The scientists I was sometimes brought together with in order to be able to follow new findings in the field of chemistry, treated me politely and matter-of-factly, if somewhat condescending to because of my foreign nationality. I knew that no one thought they had reason to envy me. In short: in a way, I could feel freer than freedom. But at the same time as the calm also grew this strange work with the past inside me, and now I can't rest until I have written down my memories from a certain content ¥llrich time in my life. The opportunity to write has been given to me for the sake of my scientific work, and control is only exercised the moment I leave a finished work in front of me. So I can afford this one pleasure, even if it were to be the last I had access to.
At the time my story begins, I was approaching forty. Otherwise, if I should introduce myself, I can perhaps tell you under which image I imagined life. There are few things that say more about a person than their view of life: whether they see it as a road, a field, a growing tree or a rolling sea. For my part, I saw it with the eyes of a kind schoolboy as a staircase, where you hurried from ledge to ledge as fast as you could, gasping for breath and the fellow competitor in the heels. In fact, I didn't have many competitors. Most of my colleagues at the laboratory had devoted all their ambitions to the military and regarded today's work as a boring but necessary break in the evenings' military service. ring. I myself would hardly want to testify for any of them, how much more interested I was in my chemistry than in my military service, although I certainly wasn't a bad soldier. Anyway, I chased up my stairs. I had never thought about how many steps one actually had to climb, nor what beauties there might be in the attic. Perhaps I vaguely imagined the house of life as one of our ordinary townhouses, where you rose from the depths of the earth and finally came out on the roof terrace, in the open air, in wind and daylight. What the wind and the daylight would correspond to in my life's journey, I did not have clear to me. But what was certain was that each new landing was signified by short official announcements from higher up: about a passed exam, a passed test, a transfer to a more significant field of activity. I also had a whole series of such vital ending and starting points behind me, though not so many that a new one would fade in importance. It was therefore with a splash of fever in my blood that I came back from the short phone call, which announced that I could wait for my control manager that day and so had to start experimenting with human material. Tomorrow thus came the final trial by fire for my greatest invention to date.
I was so excited that it felt difficult for me to start something new during the ten minutes that were still left of the working time. Instead, I cheated a little - I think almost for the first time in my life - and started putting the devices away prematurely, slowly and carefully, while I glanced through the glass walls on both sides to see if anyone was paying attention to me. As soon as the alarm bell announced that work was over for the day, I hurried out through the long laboratory corridors as one of the first in the stream. I quickly showered, changed my work clothes for my leisure uniform, ran into the paternoster lift and after a few moments stood on the street. Because we got our home in my work district, we had an aboveground license there, and I always enjoyed stretching out in the open.
When I passed the subway station, it occurred to me that I could wait for Linda. Since I was so early, she probably hadn't made it home yet from her food factory about twenty minutes away by subway. A train had just arrived, and a flood of people surged out of the earth, squeezed through the barricade where the above-ground licenses were checked, and seeped out over the surrounding streets. Over the now empty roof terraces, over all the rolled up mountain gray and meadow green tarpaulins, which in ten minutes could make the city invisible from the air, I watched the whole teeming crowd of homesickness nding fellow soldiers in leisure uniform, and it suddenly struck me that maybe all of these were carrying the same dream as me: the dream of the way up.
The thought gripped me. I knew that before, during the civilized era, people had to be attracted to work and effort by the hope of more spacious dwellings, tastier food and more beautiful clothes. Nowadays, nothing like that was needed. The standard floor - one room for the unmarried, two for the family - was enough for everyone, from the poorest to the most deserving. The home kitchen's food provided satiety for the general as well as for the private. The general uniform - one for work, one for leisure and one for military and police service - was the same for everyone, for men and women, and for Add and lay as on the degree designation. Even the latter was not really a neighbor for one or the other. The aspirational value of a higher management designation lay solely in what it symbolized. So highly changed, I thought happily, is in fact every fellow soldier in the World State, that what he perceives as the highest value of life hardly has any more concrete form for him than three black loops on the arm - three black loops, which are a pledge to him both on his own soul-guarding and respect from others. Of material pleasures one can certainly have enough and more than enough - that is precisely why I suspect that the twelve room dreams of the old civil capitalists were hardly more than a symbol either - but this most subtle of everything, which one hunts under the form of degree designations, it does not make one overfed. No one can have so much esteem and so much soul-guarding that he does not want more. On the most changeable, the most airy and unattainable of all rests our fixed social order safe for all time. is actually every fellow soldier in the World State, that what he perceives as the highest value of life hardly has any more concrete form for him than three black loops on his sleeve - three black loops , which is a pledge to him both on his own soul-guarding and respect from others. Of material pleasures one can certainly have enough and more than enough - that is precisely why I suspect that the twelve room dreams of the old civil capitalists were hardly more than a symbol either - but this most subtle of everything, which one hunts under the form of degree designations, it does not make one overfed. No one can have so much esteem and so much soul-guarding that he does not want more. On the most changeable, the most airy and unattainable of all rests our fixed social order safe for all time. is actually every fellow soldier in the World State, that what he perceives as the highest value of life hardly has any more concrete form for him than three black loops on his sleeve - three black loops , which is a pledge to him both on his own soul-guarding and respect from others. Of material pleasures one can certainly have enough and more than enough - that is precisely why I suspect that the twelve room dreams of the old civil capitalists were hardly more than a symbol either - but this most subtle of everything, which one hunts under the form of degree designations, it does not make one overfed. No one can have so much esteem and so much soul-guarding that he does not want more. On the most changeable, the most airy and unattainable of all rests our fixed social order safe for all time. that what he perceives as the highest value of life hardly has any more concrete form for him than three black loops on his sleeve - three black loops, which are a pledge to him both on own soul guarding and respect from others. Of material pleasures one can certainly have enough and more than enough - that is precisely why I suspect that the twelve room dreams of the old civil capitalists were hardly more than a symbol either - but this most subtle of everything, which one hunts under the form of degree designations, it does not make one overfed. No one can have so much esteem and so much soul-guarding that he does not want more. On the most changeable, the most airy and unattainable of all rests our fixed social order safe for all time. that what he perceives as the highest value of life hardly has any more concrete form for him than three black loops on his sleeve - three black loops, which are a pledge to him both on own soul guarding and respect from others. Of material pleasures one can certainly have enough and more than enough - that is precisely why I suspect that the twelve room dreams of the old civil capitalists were hardly more than a symbol either - but this most subtle of everything, which one hunts under the form of degree designations, it does not make one overfed. No one can have so much esteem and so much soul-guarding that he does not want more. On the most changeable, the most airy and unattainable of all rests our fixed social order safe for all time. which is a pledge to him both on his own soul-guarding and respect from others. Of material pleasures one can certainly have enough and more than enough - that is precisely why I suspect that the twelve room dreams of the old civil capitalists were hardly more than a symbol either - but this most subtle of everything, which one hunts under the form of degree designations, it does not make one overfed. No one can have so much esteem and so much soul-guarding that he does not want more. On the most changeable, the most airy and unattainable of all rests our fixed social order safe for all time. which is a pledge to him both on his own soul-guarding and respect from others. Of material pleasures one can certainly have enough and more than enough - that is precisely why I suspect that the twelve room dreams of the old civil capitalists were hardly more than a symbol either - but this most subtle of everything, which one hunts under the form of degree designations, it does not make one overfed. No one can have so much esteem and so much soul-guarding that he does not want more. On the most changeable, the most airy and unattainable of all rests our fixed social order safe for all time. Of material pleasures one can certainly have enough and more than enough - that is precisely why I suspect that the twelve room dreams of the old civil capitalists were hardly more than a symbol either - but this most subtle of everything, which one hunts under the form of degree designations, it does not make one overfed. No one can have so much esteem and so much soul-guarding that he does not want more. On the most changeable, the most airy and unattainable of all rests our fixed social order safe for all time. Of material pleasures one can certainly have enough and more than enough - that is precisely why I suspect that the twelve room dreams of the old civil capitalists were hardly more than a symbol either - but this most subtle of everything, which one hunts under the form of degree designations, it does not make one overfed. No one can have so much esteem and so much soul-guarding that he does not want more. On the most changeable, the most airy and unattainable of all rests our fixed social order safe for all time.
So I stood in thought at the entrance to the subway and saw, as if in a dream, the guard walking back and forth along the barbed wire-crowned district wall. Four trains had arrived, four times the crowds had flowed up into the daylight, when finally Linda passed the barrier. I hurried up to her and we continued side by side.
Of course, we could not speak for the air force's exercises, which neither day nor night allowed any conversation to be held outdoors. In any case, she saw my happy face and nodded encouragingly, though serious as always. Not until we had time to enter the apartment building and the lift brought us down to our floor did relative silence settle around us - the subway noise, which shook the walls, was no stronger than that you could talk freely - and yet we carefully postponed all conversations until we got inside. If someone had caught us talking in the elevator, no suspicion would have been more natural than that we were discussing topics that we didn't want the children or the housekeeper to hear. Such cases had occurred, when enemies of the state and other criminals wanted to use the elevator as a conspiracy premises; it was also close at hand, because the police ear and police eye could not be mounted in an elevator for technical reasons and because the doorman used to have other things to do than run and listen in the stairwells. So we were cautiously silent until we got into the family room, where this week's maid had already laid out the evening meal and was waiting with the children, whom she had brought down from the house's nursery. She appeared to be a proper and decent girl, and our friendly greeting was therefore not only due to the awareness that she, like all domestic servants, was obliged to report on the family at the end of the week - a reform which is widely believed to have improved the tone of many homes. An atmosphere of joy and coziness reigned around our table, especially as our eldest son, Ossu, was among the rest of us. He had come to visit from the children's camp, because it was home evening.
- I can talk about something funny, I said to Linda over the potato soup. My experiment has come so far that I can start with human material tomorrow, under the supervision of a control chief.
- Who do you think it will be? asked Linda.
It was certainly not noticeable on the outside, but inside I flinched at her words. They could be completely innocent. What was more natural than a wife asking who would be the man's control manager! How long the probationary period would be depended on the test manager's squeamishness or agreeableness. It had even happened that ambitious control managers made the controller's invention their own, and there was comparatively little opportunity to defend against such. No wonder then, if even those closest to you asked who it would be.
But I listened for an undertone in her voice. My closest manager, and thus most likely my future control manager, was Edo Rissen. And Edo Rissen had previously been employed at the food factory where Linda worked. I knew that they had a lot of contact with each other, and from several small signs I concluded that he had made a certain impression on my wife.
At her question my jealousy awoke and vented. How intimate was the relationship between her and Rissen? In a large factory it could often happen that two people were out of sight of the others, in the warehouses for example, where bales and piles obscured the view through the glass walls and where perhaps to top it all off no one else was employed at the time... Linda had also had her turn as a night watchman at the factory. Rissen could very well have his guard at the same time. Everything was possible, even the worst of everything: that it was still him she loved and not me.
At that time I rarely wondered about myself, about what I thought and felt or about what others thought and felt, unless it had directly practical meaning for me. Only later, during my solitary time as a prisoner, have the moments come back like riddles and forced me to wonder, decipher and reinterpret. Now, so long afterwards, I know that when I so eagerly hoped for "certainty" about Linda and Rissen, I didn't really want a certainty that there wasn't any connection between them. I wanted to be sure that she was pulled in another direction. I wanted a certainty that would end my marriage.
But at the time I would have rejected such a thought with contempt. Linda played an all too important role in my life, I would say. And it was true, no pondering and no reinterpretations have since been able to change it. In terms of meaning, she could well have taken up the competition with my career. Against my will, she held me in a completely unreasonable way.
You can talk about "love" as an outdated romantic concept, but I'm afraid it exists just the same, and from the very beginning it contains an indescribably painful element. A man is drawn to a woman, a woman to a man, and for every step you get closer to each other, you have wasted something of yourself; a series of defeats, where one hoped for victories. Already in my first marriage - childless and therefore nothing to continue - I had felt a foretaste. Linda escalated it to nightmare. During the first years we were married, I really had a nightmare, although I didn't put it in connection with her: I was standing in the middle of a great darkness, myself brightly lit with spotlights ; from outside the darkness I felt eyes on me, and I twisted like a worm to get away, while I could not avoid being ashamed like a dog at the indecent rags I had been made to wear. - Only later did I understand that it was a good picture of my relationship with Linda, where I myself felt frighteningly transparent, although I did everything to creep away and protect me, while she seemed to remain the same enigma, wonderful, strong, almost superhuman, but eternally unsettling, so that her enigmaticity gave her a hateful take over. When her mouth contracted into a thin red line - oh no, it wasn't a smile, neither of her nor of joy, rather it could be called a tension, as when you straining a bow - and meanwhile the eyes stood immovably wide open - then still the same rush of anxiety went through me, and still she tied me and pulled me the same mercilessly, though I sensed, that she would never open up to me. I suppose it is appropriate to use the word love, when in the midst of hopelessness you still hold on to each other, as if after all a miracle could happen - then the anguish itself has gained a kind of value of its own and has become a testimony that you have at least one thing in common: the waiting for something that doesn't exist.
All around us we saw parents getting divorced, as soon as their litter of children was ready for the children's camp - divorcing and remarrying to form new litters. Ossu, our eldest, was already eight years old and had therefore been in the children's camp for a whole year. Laila, the youngest, was four and had three years left at home. And then? Would we also divorce and remarry, in the childish notion that the same wait could become less hopeless with another? All the sense I had told me it was a deceptive illusion. A single small unreasonable hope whispered: no no - the fact that you have failed with Linda is because she wants to go to Rissen! She belongs to Rissen, not to you! Make it clear to yourself that it is Rissen she is thinking of - then everything is explained, and you still have hope for a new love with meaning!
So strangely intertwined was what woke up at Linda's self-evident question.
- Probably Rissen, I answered and eagerly listened into the silence that followed.
- is it unreasonable to ask what kind of experiment it is? asked the maid.
She had an obvious right to ask, in a sense she was there to keep track of what was going on within the family. And I could not see what could be distorted and used against me, nor how it could harm the State, if the rumor of my invention spread in advance.
- It is something I hope the State will benefit from, I said. A means that makes any person reveal their secrets, precisely everything that they have previously forced themselves to keep quiet about, out of shame or fear. Are you from this city, fellow soldier homemaker?
It happened now and then, that people were supported who were brought in from other sources in times of population shortages and who therefore had nothing else to do. As long as they managed to pick up a bit in adulthood.
- No, she said and blushed, I'm from the outside. Further explanations about where one came from were strictly forbidden, as they could be used in the service of espionage. That was of course why she blushed.
- Then I won't go into more detail about the chemical composition or the manufacturing, I said. That should perhaps be avoided for the rest, the subject must under no circumstances get into private hands. But you may have heard about how alcohol was used as an intoxicant in the past and what effects it had?
- Yes, she said, I know it made the homes unhappy, ruined the health and, in the worst case, led to tremors in the whole body and hallucinations of white mice, chickens and the like.
I recognized the words from the completely elementary textbooks and snarled. She apparently hadn't had time to catch up with the Chemist's general education.
- Quite right, I said, that was the worst case. But before it went so far, it often happened that the drunkards talked beside their mouths, betrayed secrets, and committed imprudent acts, so that their power of shame and fear was disturbed. Those are the effects my remedy has - I think, because I haven't tried it yet. But there is the difference, that it is not swallowed, but injected directly into the blood, and for the rest it has a completely different composition. It also lacks the unpleasant side effects you mentioned - at least you don't have to give such strong doses. A slight headache is all the subject feels afterwards, and it does not happen, as sometimes happened with alcoholics, that afterwards you forget what you have said. - You probably understand that it is an important invention. Henceforth, no criminal can deny the truth. Not even our innermost thoughts are our own anymore - as we have wrongly believed for so long.
- Wrongly?
- Yes, of course, wrongly. Words and actions are born from thoughts and feelings. How then could thoughts and feelings be the sole concern of the individual? Doesn't the whole fellow soldier belong to the State? Who would his thoughts and feelings belong to, if not the State, they too? So far it has just not been possible to control them - but now the remedy has been found.
She gave me a quick glance, but immediately lowered it. She didn't change a bit, but I got the impression that her color dropped.
- You have nothing to be afraid of, fellow soldier, I encouraged her. It is not meant to expose all individuals' small loves or antipathies. If my invention fell into individual hands - well, then one could easily imagine the chaos that would arise! But of course that must not happen. The means should serve our safety, everyone's safety, the State's safety.
- I am not afraid, I have nothing to be afraid of, she answered rather coldly, and yet I had only meant to be friendly.
Then we moved on to other conversations. The children told what happened during the day in the nursery. They had been playing in the toy box - a huge enameled dish, maybe four square meters in size and a meter deep, where you could not only drop small toy bombs and ignite forests and sticking-up wooden roofs material without also fighting entire naval battles in miniature, if one filled the box with water and loaded the small ships' cannons with the same light explosive used in the toy bombs; there were even torpedo boats. In this way, a strategic look was played into the children, so it became their second nature, almost an instinct, and at the same time it was fun of the first order.
It often seemed to me that the new generation was more realistic than we were in our childhood. On the very day I'm talking about, I should get a new cover for that thing. Because it was family evening, then neither Linda nor I had military or police service and then Ossu, my eldest, was at home and greeted - so the family's intimate life catered for - so I had thought of a way to amuse the children. From the laboratory I had bought home a very small piece of sodium, which I intended to float around on the water with its pale violet flame. We set out a filled dish, turned off the light and gathered around my little chemical wonder. I myself had been very excited about the phenomenon, when I was little and my father showed it to me, but for my children it was mostly a fiasco. us, who was already building fires on his own, shooting children's guns and throwing small firecrackers, pretending to be hand grenades - now, that he did not appreciate the little pale flame, it was perhaps tt natural. But the fact that Laila, the four-year-old, wasn't interested in an explosion either, if it didn't cost the lives of any enemies, that surprised me. The only one who seemed captivated was Maryl, the middle girl. She sat still and dreamy as usual and followed the scurrying lantern man with wide-open eyes, which reminded her of her mother. And while her attention probably gave me some comfort, it worried me at the same time. Clearly and clearly it dawned on me that it was Ossu and Laila who were the children of the new age. Their attitude was matter-of-fact and real, while mine was a rash of outmoded romanticism. And despite the correction she gave me, I suddenly wished that Maryl was more like the others. It was not good either, that in that way she fell outside the healthy development of the generations.
The evening passed, and it was time for Ossu to leave for the children's camp again. If he wanted to stay or was afraid of the long journey in the metro, he at least didn't show it. With his eight years, he was already a disciplined fellow soldier. Through me, on the other hand, a hot wave of longing went through me for the time when all three of them crawled into their little beds every night. A son is a son anyway, I thought, and he stands closer to his father than the daughters. And yet I didn't dare think about that day, when Maryl too, Laila too would be away and only come home two evenings a week to say hello . In any case, I was careful not to let anyone notice my weakness. The children wouldn't complain once about bad example, the housekeeper wouldn't have a weak attitude with the house father to report, and Linda - Linda least of all! I didn't want to be despised by anyone, but least of all by Linda, who herself was never weak.
Then the beds in the family room were folded out and made for the little girls, and Linda reupholstered them. The maid had just put dinner scraps and crockery into the food elevator and was getting ready to leave, when she thought of something.
- It is true, she said, a letter has arrived for you, my boss. I put it in the parents' room. Somewhat surprised, Linda and I saw the letter, a service letter. If I were the police chief of the home help, I would certainly have given her a warning about this. Either she really forgot all about it or deliberately neglected to do so, it was equally pointless not to find out what a service letter contained - she had every right to do so. But at the same time a hunch flew through me, that the letter could have such content, that I should be grateful to her for being careless.
The letter was from the Seventh Bureau of the Ministry of Propaganda. And to explain the content, I have to go back in time somewhat. The second chapter
It had happened at a party two months ago. One of the youth camp's meeting rooms was decorated with long cloths in the colors of the State, people performed skits, gave speeches, marched through the hall to the beat of a drum and ate together. The reason was that a group of girls in the youth camp received orders to move, you didn't know exactly where, there were some rumors about another of the chemistry towns, others about one of the shoe towns, in any case some place, where balance has been achieved both in terms of workforce and in terms of the percentage ratio between the sexes. From our city, and probably from some other cities as well, young women were therefore gathered together and sent away there, so that the numbers once determined could is maintained. And it was now the farewell party for those called out that was celebrated.
Such celebrations always had a certain resemblance to the party for retiring soldiers. The difference was great: at parties like this everyone knew, both those who traveled and those who stayed, that not an army would be raised against the young people who left their hometown, that on the contrary everything was done so that they would quickly and without a whimper grow into their new surroundings and that they could enjoy themselves magnificently soon enough. The only similarity was that both parties knew with almost one hundred percent certainty that they would never see each other again. Between the cities, no other connection was allowed than the official one, run by sworn and strictly controlled officials, this to avoid espionage. And even if one or another of the young people called out really ended up in the traffic service - an extremely small possibility, since the traffic officers were almost always brought up to their calling from an early age in special traffic school towns - the peculiar chance was also required for them to get their job call published just to any of the routes that led to their home town and that their leave occurred when they were in the home town; this applies to the land traffic employees - the flight crew always lived completely separate from their families and under constant surveillance. In short, it took almost a miracle of cooperating chance for the parents to get their children back, when the children had already been moved to another location. In spite of this - indeed in spite of it, one had no right to linger over the gloomy prospects on such a day - the party was a joyous celebration, as it was also claimed,
Had I myself been among the happy partygoers, the events would never have developed as they did. The hope of good food - on such occasions it is always abundant and well prepared, and the participants usually pounce on it like ravenous wolves - the drum, the speeches, the festive crowd itself, the united shouts, all carried the hall into a great common ecstasy, as was customary and desirable. However, I was neither among the parents, the siblings, nor the youth leaders. The evening was one of the four in the week, when I was doing military and police duty, and I was simply in that capacity of police secretary. This not only meant that I had my place on one of the four small corner streets and would keep records of the event, along with three other police secretaries on the other three corners, but also that it was my duty to keep a cool head in order to be able to make various observations regarding what happened in the hall. If something went wrong, if something was discussed in secret, for example if one of the participants tried to leave after the call had taken place, it was of great help for word of mouth ringers and doormen, who could often be occupied with some practical detail, that four police secretaries were constantly watching over the hall from a somewhat secluded place. So there I sat in my isolation and let my eyes wander over the crowd, and if on the one hand I would have liked to have been there myself and shared the general joy of community, then ¥ I think my sacrifice was well balanced by the awareness of my weight and dignity. For the rest, you will be relieved by another in the evening,
The young girls who took their leave probably numbered hardly more than about fifty, and they were easily distinguished in the crowd, because they wore gilded party crowns, which the town used to lend just at such cases. One of them in particular attracted my mindless attention, perhaps because she was unusually beautiful, perhaps also because she had a lively concern, like a secret fire, in her eyes and voice. rails. Several times I caught her casting searching glances in the direction of the boys - this was at the beginning of the party, while the skits were being performed and the boys from the boys' camp and the girls from n the girls' camp still sat in separate groups - until she finally seemed to find what she was looking for and the fire in her movements became still, as if it erupted into a single clear calm flame. I also thought I could make out the face she had sought and found: so painfully serious in the midst of all the expectant and happy, that one almost felt sorry for them. As soon as the last skit came to an end and the young people mingled around each other, I saw them both part the crowd as if it were water and with almost blind certainty meet approximately in the middle of the hall alone and still among all the shouting and singing people. They stood in the middle of the alarm as if on a quiet cliff without knowing in which room or in which time they were.
I woke up and snorted at myself. They had managed to drag me out with them into their antisocial world, torn from the one great sacrament for everyone: community. I was probably very tired, because it had felt like rest just to sit and look at them. They deserved pity last of all, those two, I thought. What could really be more useful for a fellow soldier's character development than getting used to big sacrifices for big goals early on? How many don't go about their whole life longing for a sacrifice that is big enough? Envy was the only thing I could give them, and envy was probably also there in the dissatisfaction I thought I could distinguish among the companions of both young people - envy, and also a little contempt for so much time and energy were wasted on a single person. For my part, I could not despise them.
In any case, I must have been tired, because my interest was constantly revolving around the few elements of seriousness that the merry party offered. Only a few minutes after I released the two youths with my eyes and they were separated for the rest by unbearable comrades, my attention was stuck instead on a meager medium Elder's woman, probably the mother of one of the called out girls. She also seemed somehow disconnected from the standing collective. I don't really know how I perceived this, I could never prove it, because she was still participating all the time, moving in step with the marchers, nodding with the speakers, shouting with the shouters. Still, I thought I understood that it happened mechanically, that she was not lifted by the liberating wave of the collective but somehow stood outside, also outside of his own voice and his own movements, detached in the same way as the two young ones. People around her must have had the same feeling, they tried to get at her from different sides. Several times I saw from my platform, how someone took her by the arm and pulled her along or nodded and spoke to her, but soon disappointed withdrew even though her answers and smiles worked flawlessly. It was just a small lively and ugly man, who was not easily deterred. When she fired her weary smile at him and then resumed her even more weary seriousness, he was unseen standing a little way away and watching her with clear thoughtfulness. they tried to get at her from different sides. Several times I saw from my platform, how someone took her by the arm and pulled her along or nodded and spoke to her, but soon disappointed withdrew even though her answers and smiles worked flawlessly. It was just a small lively and ugly man, who was not easily deterred. When she fired her weary smile at him and then resumed her even more weary seriousness, he was unseen standing a little way away and watching her with clear thoughtfulness. they tried to get at her from different sides. Several times I saw from my platform, how someone took her by the arm and pulled her along or nodded and spoke to her, but soon disappointed withdrew even though her answers and smiles worked flawlessly. It was just a small lively and ugly man, who was not easily deterred. When she fired her weary smile at him and then resumed her even more weary seriousness, he was unseen standing a little way away and watching her with clear thoughtfulness. who was not so easily deterred. When she fired her weary smile at him and then resumed her even more weary seriousness, he was unseen standing a little way away and watching her with clear thoughtfulness. who was not so easily deterred. When she fired her weary smile at him and then resumed her even more weary seriousness, he was unseen standing a little way away and watching her with clear thoughtfulness.
The tired and secluded woman somehow drew me close, without my knowing why. Understandably, I realized that already earned the envy of both young people, she did so to an even greater degree; her self-sacrificing heroism was greater than theirs, and thus also her strength and fame. After all, the feelings of the young would soon fade away and be replaced by some new flame, and if they tried to hold on to the memory, it would soon cease to sting and become only beautiful and bright and an asset in everyday life. The mother's sacrifice could be such that it became new every day. I felt such a longing myself, which was hard enough, although I would surely manage to overcome it one day - I mean the longing for Ossu, my elder, and then he came home twice a week, and I really hoped that I would be allowed to keep him in Chemical City No. 4, even after he became an adult. Of course, I sensed that this was an all too personal attitude towards the little fellow soldiers you gave the State, and openly I would never want to show it, but secretly it cast a certain shimmer over my life, perhaps not least because it was so completely secret and controlled. I recognized the same torment and approach in the woman, also the same firm control. I couldn't help but imagine myself in her shoes: how she would never see her daughter again, hardly hear anything from her either, as the post office thinned out private letters more and more and more hard-handed, so that nowadays only really important information, briefly and factually presented and provided with relevant verifications, was delivered to the addressee. And a somewhat presumptuous and individual romantic thought came to me, about a kind of "compensation", which should accrue to the fellow soldiers, when they sacrificed their sentimental existence for the State, and it should consist in the highest and richest thing one could aspire to: in glory. Since honor was comfort enough and more than enough for mutilated warriors, why should it not also be so for every fellow soldier who felt mutilated inside? It was a touching and romantic thought, and later in the evening it gave birth to an exaggerated action. and it should consist in the highest and richest thing one could aspire to: in honor. Since honor was comfort enough and more than enough for mutilated warriors, why should it not also be so for every fellow soldier who felt mutilated inside? It was a touching and romantic thought, and later in the evening it gave birth to an exaggerated action. and it should consist in the highest and richest thing one could aspire to: in honor. Since honor was comfort enough and more than enough for mutilated warriors, why should it not also be so for every fellow soldier who felt mutilated inside? It was a touching and romantic thought, and later in the evening it gave birth to an exaggerated action.
Then the hour of relief struck, I made way for a new police secretary, stepped down into the crowd and sought to melt into the general rapture. Maybe I was too tired and hungry for it to fully succeed. As it was, just then they set the evening dining tables in from the kitchen regions on well-greased rails, and everyone gathered their tent chairs around the splendours. Whether it was pure coincidence, or whether she sought me out on purpose, I don't know, but funnily enough, the very woman I noticed came to sit across from me. It is not impossible that she had seen me and read sympathy in my face. What was certainly not a coincidence, however, was that the small lively and ugly man, who had previously paid attention to her, also came forward and settled down right next to her.
Judging by his behavior, he had intended to force out exactly what the woman wanted to hide. Everything he said was innocent enough in and of itself, but all the time touched on the wound he sensed in his table neighbor. He spoke plaintively of the loneliness that awaited the young girls. To avoid harmful coterie formation, he said, the transferees always used to be placed out of reach of each other. Then there were the difficulties with the new climate and the new lifestyle. As for the Shoe Towns, which were guessed at - how did such a rumor get out, the destination of the trip was and should be secret, and the guesses could be false as well as true! - as far as the Shoe Towns were concerned, few of them were located as far south as Kemistaden no. 4, but the vast majority were far to the north and had a completely Nordic climate with long, hard and dark winters, which could make any stranger melancholy. The worst part was the language. The common official language within the mighty World State had unfortunately not had time to become the common language of conversation everywhere. In many places, vernaculars were still spoken, which were starkly different from each other. He, for his part, had heard someone tell in confidence that one of the Shoe Cities would have a very difficult language with completely different stems and completely different inflections n you were used to here. But you should never believe rumour-mongers, the person in question had perhaps never been outside Chemical City No. 4 once! which could make any stranger melancholy. The worst part was the language. The common official language within the mighty World State had unfortunately not had time to become the common language of conversation everywhere. In many places, vernaculars were still spoken, which were starkly different from each other. He, for his part, had heard someone tell in confidence that one of the Shoe Cities would have a very difficult language with completely different stems and completely different inflections n you were used to here. But you should never believe rumour-mongers, the person in question had perhaps never been outside Chemical City No. 4 once! which could make any stranger melancholy. The worst part was the language. The common official language within the mighty World State had unfortunately not had time to become the common language of conversation everywhere. In many places, vernaculars were still spoken, which were starkly different from each other. He, for his part, had heard someone tell in confidence that one of the Shoe Cities would have a very difficult language with completely different stems and completely different inflections n you were used to here. But you should never believe rumour-mongers, the person in question had perhaps never been outside Chemical City No. 4 once! In many places, vernaculars were still spoken, which were starkly different from each other. He, for his part, had heard someone tell in confidence that one of the Shoe Cities would have a very difficult language with completely different stems and completely different inflections n you were used to here. But you should never believe rumour-mongers, the person in question had perhaps never been outside Chemical City No. 4 once! In many places, vernaculars were still spoken, which were starkly different from each other. He, for his part, had heard someone tell in confidence that one of the Shoe Cities would have a very difficult language with completely different stems and completely different inflections n you were used to here. But you should never believe rumour-mongers, the person in question had perhaps never been outside Chemical City No. 4 once!
For a moment it occurred to me that the little man's behavior must be prompted by some kind of desire for revenge, but I was soon forced to abandon that thought. From the woman's polite and trivializing answer, I understood that they had just become acquainted, perhaps only this evening. And little by little I sensed how it was connected: the man had no personal reason whatsoever for what he did, all his mercilessness was represented by the purest concern for the good of the State. He had no other objective than to expose the woman, who went about carrying private sentimental and antisocial feelings, to shame her in a burst of tears or a violent response , so that he could later point to her and say: Look, what we still have and must endure among us! - From this point of view, the man's endeavor became not only understandable, without even respectability, and the fencing between him and the attacked took on a new, principled meaning. I followed it attentively, and when the sympathies finally rested on her side, it was no longer due to weak sympathy, but to something I did not want. vde is ashamed in front of whoever it is: admiration for the almost male superiority she showed when it came to fending off his thrusts. Not a twitch of her face disturbed the polite smile, not a tremor in her voice penetrated the coolly light tone, as she met his skilful attack with the one ground of comfort more shallow than the other. Young people have learned easily, a northern climate is many times healthier than a southern one, in the World State no fellow soldier need feel alone, and why do you regret that she forgets hers? Nothing is more desirable when moving.
I was really disappointed, when the elegant fencing was interrupted by a rough red-haired man nearby:
- What kind of sentimental nonsense is there! Listen now, fellow soldier there, what are your names, you sit and blackmail the actions of the State on a day like this! To the purchase for one of the mothers! Here, if ever, joy is in its place, not worries and sighs!
Just then the speeches would start again, and in my brain was born the unfortunate decision to aim another stab at the little man. My duty for the evening was not quite over yet, I was one of the official speakers. so it happened that my speech, quite carefully prepared as it was, with food and all, had a fatally improvised ending:
- And, fellow soldiers, their heroism is not diminished by the fact that it is sometimes accompanied by pain. Pain feels the warrior from his wounds, pain feels the widow of the fallen warrior over his dock, although the joy of serving the State outweighs this pain manifold. Pain must also be spared to those who have to part ways in working life, in most cases forever. And is it worth our tribute, when mother and daughter, comrade and comrade part with joy in their eyes and tears on their lips, then it is not less worthy of our admiration, if behind the joy and liveropening lies a sadness, a controlled, a denied sadness - rather this is perhaps more worthy of our admiration more, therefore Is that it is a greater sacrifice to the State.
Cheered and ready to applaud as the crowd already was, it immediately burst into a storm of clapping and shouting. But I saw that here and there among the clapping there were also those who defiantly kept their hands still. A thousand may clap their hands, and two keep still - and then the two are even more important than the thousand; of course, since the two may mean two informers, while not one of the thousand lifts a finger to defend the exultant, once he is indicated - and how could they Is the rest able to do it? You understand so easily that it was not a pleasant situation to stand there pathetically gripped and all the time feeling the little ugly man's eyes like a series of arrow shots. I cast a quick glance in his direction as if in passing. Of course he didn't clap.
What I now held in my hand was that evening's reckoning. It was hard to say who reported me, it didn't have to be the little one. In any case, I had apparently been reported. The paper read:
"Med soldier Leo Kall, Kemistaden nr. 4. - Since the Ministry of Propaganda's Seventh Bureau tested the content of your speech at the Youth Camp's farewell party for conscripted workers on April 19 this year, it has decided inform you of the following:
As a whole-hearted fighter is always more effective than a divided one, so must also a cheerful fellow-soldier, who neither admits to himself nor to others that he sacrifices anything, is recognized with greater value than a dejected one, who is burdened by his so-called victim, even if he hides his dejection; and consequently we have no reason to exalt fellow-soldiers, who seek to hide division, discouragement, and personal sentimentality under a controlled mask of joy, but only those who, happy throughout, have not ¥good to hide, whereas the disclosure of the former is a commendable act for the good of the State.
We expect you to present your apology as soon as possible to the same congregation that then heard you, to the extent that it is possible to ¥ter find it collected, otherwise in local radio.
<p align=center>The Seventh Bureau of the Ministry of Propaganda." The third chapter
My reaction was so intense that I was later embarrassed in front of Linda. But that it would come today, in the midst of the joy of victory! That I, in the midst of my greatest hopes, should be met with such a blow! Apart from me as I was, I said several things that were not well thought out and that even today, despite my good memory, I have difficulty remembering, that I was a fa Lost man, my career crushed, my future dishonoured, my great invention feather-light against this, which would be on my secret card in every police department throughout the World State, and so ¥ further. And when Linda tried to comfort me, I really thought at first that it was pure falsehood and that she was just pondering how best to leave the sinking ship, even though the children are nnu was of home age.
- Soon everyone will know what state-dangerous speeches I usually give, I said bitterly. If you ask for a divorce, do it, don't worry that the children are small. In any case, it is better for them to be fatherless than to live with a state-dangerous individual like me...
- So you are exaggerating, Linda said calmly. (I still remember even the word itself. It was not the calmness, not the motherliness of her tone that convinced me of her sincerity, it was the heavy, almost indifferent weariness.) So you exaggerate. How many distinguished fellow soldiers do you think have not had remarks on them at some time and then washed themselves clean! Don't you remember all those who we have heard read their excuses on the radio on Fridays between 8 and 9 pm! You must understand that it is not the freedom of error that makes a good fellow soldier, least of all the freedom of error in such matters, where the state's ethics still have coming to be! First and foremost, it is the ability to give up one's own point of view and acquire the right one.
Finally I calmed down and began to understand that she was right. In my shaken state, I promised both her and myself to take advantage of the radio's apology hour as soon as possible. I even immediately started making a draft of my upcoming speech.
- Now you are exaggerating again, said Linda, who was leaning over my shoulder and reading what I wrote. You mustn't be knocked too flat to the ground either, and you mustn't be a rubber band, which can be stretched out in any way - then you will be suspected of being able to hit back too, in an unguarded moment. Believe me, Leo, that's the way to write when you're not as upset as you are now.
She was right, and I was grateful to have her there. She was wise, wise and strong. But why would she sound so tired?
- You're not sick, are you, Linda? I asked anxiously.
- Why would I be sick? We had a medical examination last week. I was prescribed some open-air radiation, otherwise I was spot-free.
I stood up and hugged her.
- You can't get that from me, I said. I need you. You must stay with me.
But alongside my anxiety to be left alone ran a small trickle of hope: yes why not - why couldn't she die - maybe it would be right The solution to the problem? But I didn't want to feel it. And then I pressed her against me, hard, in a kind of impotent rage.
We went to bed and turned off the light. My monthly ration of sleeping pills ran out a long time ago.
Even if her smooth warmth and her scent, reminiscent of tea leaves, had not reached me in waves upon waves under our shared blanket, I would have laughed that evening Longing for her, for a closer proximity than light touches can give. The honor had changed me. In my youth, my senses were a kind of appendage, a demanding companion, which had to be satiated in order for me to get rid of him and be able to do other things, also a proud tool of desire, but not really part of what I seriously called myself. Now it was no longer like that. Fragrance and smoothness and desire were no longer the only things I wanted. The target of my inflamed senses was something much more difficult to reach, it was that Linda, who for some brief minutes glimpsed behind the motionless wide-open eyes, behind the tense red da bow to mouth, she who had glimpsed tonight in her tired tone, in her wise calm advice. And while the pulses worked their way up in the veins, I turned on the other side and stifled a sigh. I told myself that what I wanted from the cohabitation between a man and a woman was superstition and nothing else, as much superstition as when the savages of old ate the hearts of their brave enemies in order to partake of their courage. There was no magic act that could give me the key and ownership of the garden Linda withheld from me. And what did it all serve then! as much superstition as when the savages of old ate the hearts of their brave enemies to partake of their courage. There was no magic act that could give me the key and ownership of the garden Linda withheld from me. And what did it all serve then! as much superstition as when the savages of old ate the hearts of their brave enemies to partake of their courage. There was no magic act that could give me the key and ownership of the garden Linda withheld from me. And what did it all serve then!
On the wall sat the policeman's ear and next to it the policeman's eye, just as active in the dark as in the light. No one could find them other than well-motivated: what hotbeds of espionage and conspiracies the parents' rooms could otherwise be, preferably as they were also used as visiting rooms! Later, when I got such an intimate insight into the family lives of several fellow soldiers, I was forced to put the police ear and the police eye in close connection with the unsatisfactory nativity curve within the World State. But I hardly think it was because of them that my blood stopped so easily these days. At least it had never been like that before. Our World State least of all had an ascetic view of sex, on the contrary it was necessary and honorable to breed new fellow soldiers, and everything was done so that men and women of all ages would have the opportunity to fulfill their duty in that respect. From the beginning, I also wouldn't have minded if someone from a higher place now and then stated that I was a man. Rather, it had been a spur. Over our nights before there had been a glimmer of festive performance, where the two of us were nothing more than solemnly arrested and responsible completers of your ritual in the State's own view But a shift had set in over the years. Whereas before, even in my most intimate dealings, I mostly asked how I was valued by that Power, which also used the eye on the wall, that power had now been replaced more and more in a troublesome suspension precisely at such moments when I most wildly longed for Linda and for the never-reached and never-attainable wonder, which would make me master of her innermost mysteries. The eye I asked about was still there, but it was Linda herself. I began to sense that my love had taken an unduly private turn, and it troubled my conscience. After all, the goal of marriage was children, what did that have to do with superstitious dreams of keys and lordship! Maybe this dangerous turn in my marriage was another reason to divorce. And for myself, I wondered if other divorces around us could have the same reasons... but it was Linda herself. I began to sense that my love had taken an unduly private turn, and it troubled my conscience. After all, the goal of marriage was children, what did that have to do with superstitious dreams of keys and lordship! Maybe this dangerous turn in my marriage was another reason to divorce. And for myself, I wondered if other divorces around us could have the same reasons... but it was Linda herself. I began to sense that my love had taken an unduly private turn, and it troubled my conscience. After all, the goal of marriage was children, what did that have to do with superstitious dreams of keys and lordship! Maybe this dangerous turn in my marriage was another reason to divorce. And for myself, I wondered if other divorces around us could have the same reasons...
So I decided to sleep, but couldn't. Instead, the letter from the Seventh Bureau of the Ministry of Propaganda began to dance around me, so I no longer knew which side I wanted to be on.
A whole-hearted fighter is more effective than a divided one, it is understandable, it is logical. And what to do with the divided? How to force them into wholeheartedness?
An eerie discovery: here I lay, feeling anxious on behalf of the divided, as if I were one of them myself. There I couldn't let it go. I didn't want to be divided, as a fellow soldier I was absolutely wholehearted, without a drop of betrayal and treachery. The useless ones would go away, she too, the thin restrained mother from the party. Shoot the splits! would be my watchword from now on. And your marriage? asked a small mean thought. But I gave it an answer in words: If it doesn't get better, I'm going to get a divorce. Of course I'm going to divorce. But not until the children are of home age.
And suddenly an idea washed over me with clarity and relief: my own invention was right in line with the Seventh Bureau's letter. Hadn't I myself spoken to the domestic worker in the same spirit today? I would be believed and forgiven for the sake of my invention, in deed I had shown myself to be trustworthy, and that weighed even more than a few bygone words at a little trash party. After all, I was a good fellow soldier and could perhaps become an even better one.
Before falling asleep, I had to chuckle to myself at a comical and satisfying fantasy, such a whimsical image, which usually appears in the mind just before falling asleep: I saw how also the little ugly and lively man from the party stood with a warning in his hand and was sweating cold - the big redhead had reported him for his attempt to stand Celebrate the joy and blacken the State's actions. It was actually worse then... The fourth chapter
Not that it was my habit to sunbathe over time, not after the morning gym or otherwise, but that morning I think I rushed through the shower and put on my work uniform in a particularly hasty manner to be able to stand finished in full swing, when the door to my laboratory room opened and the controller stepped in.
When he finally came, of course it was Rissen. Just as I thought.
If I was disappointed, I at least hoped it didn't show on the outside. There had been a slight possibility that it would be another, but it was Rissen. And as he stood there in front of me, inconspicuous in his demeanor and almost hesitant, I realized that I didn't loathe him because maybe there was something to discover between him and Linda, without the fact that, on the contrary, I particularly disliked the idea of ​​a relationship between him and Linda precisely because it concerned Rissen. Anyone else, but not him. Rissen would certainly not put any extra stumbling blocks on my scientific path, he was too modest for that. But I, for my part, would rather have a less modest and more insidious control manager, one against whom I could measure my own strength - if only I could have more respect for him at the same time. Rissen could not be held in high esteem, he was too different from others, he was too ridiculous. It was not so easy to express what it was that was lacking in the man, but if you used the word marching pace, it gave a certain idea of ​​the matter. The determined demeanor, the clear and measured way of speaking, which was the only natural and dignified thing for an adult fellow soldier, did not suit Rissen. As it was, he could become far too eager, let the words stumble over each other, even be guilty of accidental and comical hand movements, and in between make long unmotivated pauses, lost in thought, blurted out some worthless words that only the initiated understood. Almost animalistic uncontrollable twitches could pass over his face in my, a subordinate's, presence, when he heard talk of something that particularly interested him. On the one hand, I knew that he had brilliant merit as a scientist; On the other hand, even though it concerned my boss, I could not turn a blind eye to the fact that there was a mismatch between his value as a scientist and his value as a fellow soldier.
- Yes, he began, as if the working hours had been his private property. - Yeah. Yes, I have received a very thorough account of this whole thing. I think I have it ready for me.
And he began to repeat my account in more important points.
- My boss, I interjected intolerably, I have already allowed myself to order down five people from the Voluntary Offer Service. They sit and wait in the corridor hall.
He looked at me sullenly with his thoughtful eyes. I had the impression that he hardly saw me. He was really weird.
- Yes, call one of them in then, he said. It sounded like he was thinking out loud, not like he was speaking an order. I pressed the bell to the waiting hall. Shortly after that, a man stepped in with one arm tied, stopped before the door, greeted and registered as No. 135 of the Voluntary Offer Service.
A little annoyed, I asked if it had really been completely impossible to send a fresh test subject. During my work as an assistant at one of the medical laboratories, it had happened that my boss at the time managed to get hold of a woman whose entire gland activity had been disturbed by a previous attempt. k, and I remembered very well that it kept shifting the whole result of his investigations. I didn't want to risk something like that. For the rest, I knew from the regulations that one should strictly hold on to one's right to get fresh test subjects: the habit of sending the same and the same suckers incessantly easily a kind of favoritism system, so that never-so-talented and willing tenderers might not for a long time get the chance to show their courage and get a little extra profit.
The man stretched and apologized on behalf of his department. They really had no one else to send. Right now, work was particularly feverish at the war gas laboratory, and the Voluntary Offer Service was under fire day in and day out to the last man. No. 135 himself felt quite excellent, as near as a war gas injury with complications in the left hand, and in his own excuse he wanted to say that because it received long ago should have been healed - even the chemist who created it couldn't say why it wasn't actually - so at least he considered himself fresh, and he hoped it the small gas damage would not bother.
In fact, it wouldn't bother me at all, so I calmed down.
- It's not your hands we need, but your nervous system, I said. And I can say in advance that the experiment will neither be painful nor leave any damage whatsoever, not even temporary.
No. 135 stretched further, as far as it was possible. When he answered, the voice was almost like a fanfare:
- I regret that the State does not yet demand greater sacrifices from me. I am ready for anything.
- Of course, I don't doubt it, I answered seriously.
I was convinced that he meant what he said. The only thing I had to object to was that he emphasized his heroism a little too strongly. Even a scientist in his laboratory can be brave, although he has yet to show it, I thought. For the rest, it wasn't too late yet: what he said about the feverish work at the war gas laboratory was another sign that it was brewing for war. Another thing, which I observed for myself but did not want to discuss in order to avoid being considered pessimistic and querulous, was that the food had consistently deteriorated during the last months.
So I put the man in a comfortable chair, which had been specially moved in for my experiments, folded up his arm, washed the elbow and inserted the small syringe, filled with his pale green blood tska. At the same moment No. 135 felt the sting of the syringe, his face tensed up, so that it almost became beautiful. I must admit that I thought I saw a hero in the chair in front of me. At the same time, the color of his face dropped somewhat, which could not possibly be due to the light green liquid, which could not possibly have had time to work so quickly.
- How does it feel? I asked encouragingly, while the contents of the syringe were reduced. Still from the regulations, I knew that you should preferably ask the subject himself as much as possible, it gave him a feeling of equality and respect jde him in a certain way over the pains.
- Thanks - as usual! replied No. 135, but he spoke noticeably slowly as if to hide that his lips were trembling.
While he sat there waiting for the effects, we studied his cards, which he put down on the table. Year of birth, gender, race type, body type, temperament type, blood type and so on, idiosyncrasies in the family, acquired diseases (a whole range of course, almost all acquired through experiments). I wrote the necessary things down in my own new and carefully laid out card system. The only thing that confused me was the year of birth, but it probably had its accuracy, and I remembered that I had already heard and noted during my time as an assistant, that the subjects in the Voluntary offer search almost as a rule looked ten years older than they really were. - When this was done, I turned again to No. 135, who began to turn in his chair.
- Well?
The man laughed childishly and hopefully.
- I feel so good like that. I have never felt so good. But what I'm afraid...
The moment had arrived. We listened and heeded. My heart pounded. Now if the man didn't say anything at all? Now if he didn't have something that he went and kept quiet with? If what he was about to say was nothing remarkable at all? Then how would my control manager ever be convinced? And how could I be sure myself? A theory, if never so well founded, is and remains a theory as long as it is not tested. I could have been mistaken.
Then something happened that I wasn't prepared for. The big rough man began to sob in despair. He slid down into the chair, so he was hanging over the armrest like a rag, and slowly tossed back and forth with long moans. I can't express how embarrassing it was, I didn't know how to hold my body or my face. Rissen's mastery, I must admit, left nothing to be desired. If he was as unpleasantly touched as I was, he hid it better as soon as possible.
That went on for several minutes. I was ashamed in front of my boss, as if I could be held responsible for him having to witness such scenes. And yet, it was impossible for me to know in advance what the subjects would be exposed to, nor did I or even our entire laboratory have any special management position for them: they were sent out from a central center in the laboratory block, so that they could be at hand for all the surrounding institutions.
Finally he calmed down. The sobs subsided, and he straightened up to a slightly more dignified position. Eager to put an end to the embarrassing performance, I asked him the first best question I could get my hands on:
- How is it?
He directed his gaze at us. It was very clear that he was aware of our presence and our questions, even if he might not have fully understood who we were. When he answered, he clearly addressed us, but not as one addresses one's superiors, but as one addresses dreamy and nameless listeners.
- I am so unhappy, he said flatly. I don't know what to do. I don't know how I'm going to cope.
- Endurance what? I asked.
- This, all of it. I am so scared. I'm always so scared. Not right now, but otherwise, almost always.
- For the experiments?
- Yes of course - for the experiments. Right now I don't understand what I'm afraid of. Either it hurts or it doesn't hurt too much, either you become crippled or you get well again, you either die or you live on - what now it to be afraid of? But I've always been so afraid - ridiculous, why should you be so afraid?
The first lethargy had now given way and was followed by a clearly intoxicated apathy.
- And then, he said and tossed his head drunkenly, then at least you are still saved from what they say. You are a coward, they would say, and that is worse than anything else. You are a coward. I'm not a coward. I don't want to be a coward. For the rest, what would it do if I were a coward? What if they said that, when I really am? But if I lose the place then... I'll find something else. They could always use one somewhere. Surely they won't have time to throw me out. I'll go myself. Voluntarily, from the Voluntary Offer Service. Voluntarily, as I came.
He frowned again, but not to unhappiness but to dull bitterness.
- I hate them, he continued unexpectedly bitten. I hate them, where they go about their laboratories without shame or blemish, without needing to be afraid of wounds and plagues and calculated and uncalculated consequences. Then they go home to their wives and children. Do you think someone like me can have a family? I tried to get married once, me, but it didn't work, you understand that it didn't work. You get too busy with yourself, when you feel like this. No woman can stand that. I hate all women. They attract one, you understand, but they can't stand one. They are fake. I hate them, except my comrades in the Offering Service of course. The women in Offertjänsten are not real women anymore, they are nothing to hate. We who are there, we don't have it like others. We are called fellow soldiers, but how are we doing? We get to live at Hemmet,
His voice dropped to a slurred mumble as he repeated: I hate…
- My boss, I said, do you want me to give him another syringe?
I hoped he would say no, because the man was deeply unsympathetic to me. But Rissen nodded, and I could do nothing but obey. As I slowly introduced more pale green liquid into the blood of No. 135, I said to him quite sharply:
- You yourself have rightly pointed out that it is called the Voluntary Offer Service. So what do you have to complain about? It is disgusting to hear a grown man complain about his own actions. You must once have signed up completely without coercion, you like everyone else.
I am afraid that my words were not really directed at the sedated person, who precisely in his sedation should be quite impervious to reason, but rather to Rissen, because he At least would know where he had me.
- Of course I went myself, murmured No. 135, wide-awake and confused, of course I went myself - but I didn't know that it was the way it was. I still believed themt was to suffer - but in a different way, a more solemn way - and to die - but all at once, and in rapture. Not day and night inch by inch. I think it would be nice to die. You had to hit with your arms. You had to rustle. I saw someone die at Hemmet once - he was flapping his arms and stammering. It was horrible. But it wasn't just horrible. You can't imitate that. But since then I have always thought that it would probably be nice to be able to behave like that, just once. You have to, you can't stop it. If it were voluntary, it would be inappropriate. But it is not voluntary: No one else is allowed to stop it for you. You just do it. When you die, you can behave however you like, without anyone being able to stop you.
I stood and turned a glass rod.
- The man must be perverted in some way, I said softly to Rissen. This is not how a healthy fellow soldier reacts.
Rissen didn't answer.
- Can you really be reckless enough to push the responsibility..., I started a little fierce speech to the subject. I noticed that Rissen gave me a long look, which was at once cold and amused, and felt how I blushed at the thought that now he surely believed that I was making myself important Is him. (A very unfair thought, I said.) In any case, I had to finish the sentence and continued in a much tamer voice: - - on others for choosing a profession like you then don't think suits you?
No. 135 certainly did not react at all to the tone and tone of voice, only to the question itself.
- Others? he said. - Myself? But I don't want to. Although it's true, I wanted to. There were ten of us from my department who signed up, more than anyone else in the entire youth camp. It went like a hurricane over the youth camp - I have often wondered how it happened. Everything just ended up in the Voluntary Offer Service. Lectures, films, talks: Voluntary quote service. And for the first few years I still thought: it was all worth it. We went and registered, you understand. And when you looked at your neighbor, you hardly thought you saw a human anymore. The faces, you understand. Like fire. Not like flesh and blood. Holy, divine. The first years I thought: We have experienced something different and more than ordinary mortals get to experience, now we pay in arrears, and we can, according to what we have seen. - - - But we can't. I can not. I can't hold on to the memory any longer, it's slipping away, further and further away. Sometimes in the past there could be glimpses when I wasn't searching at all, but every time I search - and I have to search to find the meaning in my life again - so I feel that it doesn't want more, it has slipped too far. I think I've exhausted it by looking for it too much. Sometimes I can lie awake and ponder what it would have been like if I had had a normal life - if I had then experienced an equally great moment once more maybe, or maybe not until now - or if all that greatness had been spread over life, so it would still have had meaning - in any case, if perhaps it had not been so helpless ¶rbi then. You need one now, you understand, not just a lost moment that you have to live on for the rest of your life. You can't stand this, even though you once got to be a part of - - - But you're ashamed. You are ashamed to betray the only moment in life that was worth something. Betrayal. Why do you betray? I just want to have a normal life to find meaning again. I took on too much. I can not take it. Tomorrow I go and report that I quit.
A kind of relaxation set in. Once again he broke the silence:
- Do you think you face such a moment one more time - when you die? I've thought about it a lot. I would like to die. If you don't get anything else out of life anymore, you still get that. When you say: I can't stand it, you mean: I can't stand living. You don't mean: I can't stand it - because of that you can stand it, you can always stand it, because then you can be as you want...
He was silent and sat still, leaning back against the backrest. A greenish pallor began to spread over the face. The body twitched almost imperceptibly in slight hiccups. The hands slid tentatively along the armrest, and the whole man seemed to wake up to anxiety and choking. No wonder for the rest, when he had received a double dose. I handed him soothing drops in a glass of water.
- He will recover soon, I said. It is only when the effects wear off that he feels a little sick. Then it's over. In a way, he probably has his most unpleasant job ahead of him: crawling back into fear and shame. Look, my boss! I think it might be worth watching him.
In the work itself, Rissen's eyes were already hanging at No. 135 with an expression as if it was he and not the subject who was ashamed. The man in front of us certainly did not offer an encouraging sight. The veins at his temple bulged and swelled, and the muscles at the corners of his mouth trembled in suppressed horror of a far worse kind than the one he had concealed upon entering the room. He kept his eyes convulsively closed, as if he hoped at all that it would turn his all-too-clear memory into a bad dream.
- He remembers everything that has happened? asked Rissen softly.
- Everything, I'm afraid. For the rest, I don't know if it should be considered an advantage or a disadvantage.
With the utmost reluctance, the subject finally decided to open his eyes so much that he could barely and evenly feel his way across the floor. Crouched and uncertain, he took a few steps from the chair without daring to look any of us in the face.
- Then I can thank you for the service, I said and sat down at the table. (The custom demanded that the defendant then answer: "I have only done my duty", but even such a formalist as I was at the time did not have the courage to adhere too strictly to the convention , as it concerned subjects after the experiment.) I'll print out the certificate right away, I said, so you can then withdraw compensation at the till whenever you want. I write it after grade 8: moderate discomfort without the following but. The pain and nausea is really nothing to talk about, so really it should have been class 3. But I think I understand that you - um - how shall I express myself - are ashamed a crumble.
Absent-mindedly, he grabbed the paper and staggered towards the door. There he stopped indecisively for a couple of seconds, suddenly turned stiffly and stammered:
- Maybe I can just say that I don't understand what happened to me. I was out of my mind and talking in a way that I don't mean at all. No one can love their job more than I do, and it doesn't occur to me to quit, of course. I seriously hope that I can show my good will by suffering the most difficult experiments for the State's sake.
- At least you can stay until the hand is healed, I said lightly. Otherwise, you will probably find it difficult to be accepted for any other job. What else have you learned? As far as I know, unnecessary extra training is not usually wasted on any fellow soldier, and a man of your age would not want to throw himself into a new area, especially as you can't imagine any kind of "disability" for the profession you have chosen...
I know to this day, that I spoke arrogantly and arrogantly. The thing was, that I unexpectedly got a certain aversion to my first subject. I thought I had enough reasons for such an attitude: the cowardice and selfish irresponsibility, which he hid under a mask of courage and willingness to sacrifice, when he was aware that his superiors wanted it that way. Yes, the Seventh Bureau's guidelines had indeed gotten into my blood! When it came to disguised cowardice, I saw for myself how disgusting it was, although I didn't notice it when it came to disguised sadness. What I didn't see clearly, however, was another reason for my apathy, one that I only later discovered and understood: again, envy. That man there, inferior in many ways as he was, spoke of a moment of high bliss, indeed past and almost forgotten, but still a moment... His short ecstatic walk to the youth camp's propaganda office on the day he signed up for the Voluntary Offer Service - yes, I envied him. Would perhaps a single such moment have quenched my unquenchable thirst, which I tried in vain to quench at Linda's? Although I did not think these thoughts finished, I had a feeling that the man was a pardoned, but ungrateful, and it made me hard.
Instead, Rissen behaved in a way that stunned me. He walked straight up to No. 135, put his hand on his shoulder, and said in a tone so warm that one hardly ever heard it used to adults, least of all between men, without ¥ its height when especially emotional mothers spoke to small children:
- Don't be afraid now. You understand that nothing personal comes out here. It's as if it had never been said.
The man looked up timidly, turned hastily and disappeared through the door. I thought I understood his embarrassment. If he had an ounce more pride, I thought, he would surely have spat in the face of a boss who behaved so familiarly to a subordinate. And further I thought: How can you respect and obey such a boss! The one whom no one needs to be afraid of cannot demand any respect either, naturally enough, since respect always implies a recognition of power, superiority, power - and power, in Superiority and power are always dangerous for the environment.
So we were alone, Rissen and I, and a long silence fell over the room. I didn't like Rissen's breaks. They were neither rest nor work, they came to an approximate.
- I know what you are thinking, my boss, I finally said to push on. You think that this proves nothing. I may have instructed the man beforehand. What he said was certainly personally compromising, but not punishable. Isn't that what you think?
- No, said Rissen and looked as if he woke up. No, I didn't think so. It was clear enough that the man said a lot that he really meant but did not for the life of him want to have said. There is no mistaking that it was genuine, both what he confessed and the shame afterwards.
In my own interest, I should have been happy about his gullibility, but the fact was that it irritated me, because I thought it was too light-hearted. In our World State, where every single one of the fellow soldiers from the earliest years is brought up to strict self-control, it would certainly not have been impossible that No. 135 carried out a magnificent acting performance, although it happened not to be like that. But I held back my criticism and simply replied:
- Is it undisciplined if I suggest we continue?
The strange man did not seem to notice what I said.
- A peculiar invention, he said thoughtfully. How did you come up with it?
- I built on previous findings, I answered. A drug with similar effects has existed for over five years, but with such toxic side effects that the test subjects ended up in mental hospitals almost without exception - if only they had been used nda a single time. The inventor destroyed a lot of people on it and received such a sharp warning, that the whole thing had to lie. Now I have managed to neutralize the toxic side effects. I admit that I was very excited about how it would go in practice...
And hastily, as more in passing, I added:
- I hope my invention gets the name callocain after myself.
- Sure, sure, Rissen said indifferently. Do you have any idea how important it will be?
- I can guess it. When the need is greatest, help is closest, it says. You know that the false testimonies are starting to flood the courts. Hardly a trial occurs, where the statements of the various witnesses do not contradict each other, and in a way that cannot possibly be due to mistake or carelessness. What it depends on, no one can figure out, but it is so.
- is it that hard? asked Rissen, drumming against the edge of the table in a way that annoyed me. Is it really that hard to figure it out? Allow me a question - well, you don't have to answer it if you don't feel like it - but do you consider perjury to be evil under any circumstances?
- Of course not, I answered a little annoyed. Not if the good of the State demands it. But you can't say that about any small trifle.
- Yes, but think about it, Rissen said slyly and tilted his head. Is it not for the good of the State, if a villain is brought down, that he is innocent of exactly what he stands accused of? Is it not for the good of the State, if my incompetent, harmful, most unsympathetic enemy is brought down, even if he has not exactly done anything punishable by law? He demands consideration, of course, but what right does the individual have to consideration...
I didn't really know where he wanted to go, and time was running out. I hurriedly called the next subject myself, and while I gave her a syringe, I answered:
- In any case, it has been shown that it is a mischief and not at all useful for the State, on the contrary. But my invention will solve that problem like a breeze. Not only that the witnesses can now be checked - they won't even be needed, as the criminal confesses, happily and unreservedly, after a little injection. The misfortunes of the third degree we know - yes, understand me correctly, I certainly do not criticize that it has been used, as long as there was no other means available - you can't go around feeling in solidarity with criminals, when you know that you have nothing on your conscience...
- You seem to have an unusually strong conscience, Rissen said dryly. Or are you just pretending to have it? My experience is otherwise that no fellow soldier over forty has a really good conscience. In your youth you may have it, some, but then... For the rest, maybe you are not over forty yet?
- I'm not, I answered as calmly as I could, and luckily I was facing the new subject, so I didn't have to see Rissen in the face. I was upset, but not mainly at his rudeness to me. What annoyed me to a much greater degree was his general claim. What an intolerable condition he painted - where all fellow soldiers who had come of age walked about with a chronically bad conscience! Although he didn't say it directly, I felt it dimly as an attack on the values ​​I considered the most sacred.
He must have noticed the rejection in my tone and understood that he went too far. We worked on without any conversations other than the absolutely necessary and factual ones.
When I try to recall the following attempts in memory, it turns out that they do not have the same clear outlines and the same color and life as the First. The first had of course been the most exciting, but I still couldn't feel completely sure that my means would always prove capable, even if it had gone well for the first time. I suspect that what bothered me was my indignation against Rissen. However carefully I worked, I was not with more than half my attention, and that is perhaps why this work did not strike as deep a root in my memory as the first experiment. done. I therefore also don't care about trying to depict all the details. It is enough if I can reproduce the main impression.
Since already before dinner we had gone through the five subjects who had been sent down, and also two more, one more bound and miserable than the other, I felt quite sick. rbolted and full of a rising contempt, mixed with horror. Are there really only slobs who apply to the Voluntary Offer Service? I asked myself. But I knew it wasn't like that. I knew that noble qualities were required for someone to apply there, that it required courage, willingness to sacrifice, selflessness, determination, before surrendering to ¥t such a profession. Nor could or would I imagine that the profession destroyed those who chose it. But the insights I got into the subjects' private areas were disappointing.
No. 135 had been a coward and hid his cowardice. He had at least had his beautiful side, when he kept the great moment of his life sacred. The others were just as cowardly as him, some even more so. There were those who only complained, not only about their calling, the wounds, the diseases and the fear, which were their self-chosen lot, but also about a lot of unimportant things, the beds at Hemmet, the deteriorating food storage (so they had noticed it too!), carelessness in the health care. You could probably imagine that there had been a big moment in their lives as well, but in that case it had already slipped out of reach. They might not have offered as much willpower as No. 135 to keep it there. Truth be told: however unheroic No. 135 had seemed, while he was on his calcocain high - when I then compared him with the others, he actually began to strike me as a relative hero, at least. - But in addition, there was a lot of other things that disgusted and scared me in the other test subjects we used during the first time: more or less developed strangeness, eerie fantasies, ¤ppt lasciviousness in silence. Then there were some who did not use the Home, but were married and had their own residence; they laid out their marital difficulties in a way that was both pathetic and ridiculous. In short, one must either despair of the Voluntary Offer Service, or of all the fellow soldiers of the World State, or of the biological human species in general. - But in addition, there was a lot of other things that disgusted and scared me in the other test subjects we used during the first time: more or less developed strangeness, eerie fantasies, ¤ppt lasciviousness in silence. Then there were some who did not use the Home, but were married and had their own residence; they laid out their marital difficulties in a way that was both pathetic and ridiculous. In short, one must either despair of the Voluntary Offer Service, or of all the fellow soldiers of the World State, or of the biological human species in general. - But in addition, there was a lot of other things that disgusted and scared me in the other test subjects we used during the first time: more or less developed strangeness, eerie fantasies, ¤ppt lasciviousness in silence. Then there were some who did not use the Home, but were married and had their own residence; they laid out their marital difficulties in a way that was both pathetic and ridiculous. In short, one must either despair of the Voluntary Offer Service, or of all the fellow soldiers of the World State, or of the biological human species in general. who did not use the Home, but were married and had their own residence; they laid out their marital difficulties in a way that was both pathetic and ridiculous. In short, one must either despair of the Voluntary Offer Service, or of all the fellow soldiers of the World State, or of the biological human species in general. who did not use the Home, but were married and had their own residence; they laid out their marital difficulties in a way that was both pathetic and ridiculous. In short, one must either despair of the Voluntary Offer Service, or of all the fellow soldiers of the World State, or of the biological human species in general.
And for each one, Rissen promised just as solemnly that the precious secrets lay well before him. I had a hard time digesting that.
After a particularly strong case - the first day even, it was the last thing we had before dinner - an old man, who fantasized about murder of lust, although apparently he had never carried out any and well would never have occasion to do so either, I could not refrain from giving vent to my embarrassing mood, but turned to Rissen with a rather gratuitous plea for excuse kt for my subjects.
- You really mean that they are such exceptional rotten eggs? asked Rissen softly.
- Admittedly, not everyone is a lust killer, I answered, but everyone seems to be more than legitimately pitiful.
I had expected an agreement. It would have relieved me and in some way taken me a little further away from the whole embarrassment. When I realized that he did not share my strong disgust, the whole thing became doubly embarrassing. Still, we continued the conversation as we headed up to the dining room.
- Legally, yes legally, said Rissen. Then he switched to a different tone and line of thought and continued: Be glad we haven't run out for saints and heroes of the legal kind - I suspect I had felt less convinced then. For the rest, we haven't met a single real criminal either.
- Yes, but this last one, this last one! I admit he had done no harm, and I do not think he will commit any of the misdeeds he fancies, old as he is and cared for by the Home, there there is certainly nothing wrong with the monitoring. But imagine if he had been young and had the opportunity to put his wishes into action! In such cases my callocaine will be good to have. With that, you can predict and prevent many horrors, which are now over one, one, three, without having seen them approaching...
- Assuming you get hold of the right people. It's not that easy either. Because you hardly mean that everyone should be investigated?
- Why not? Why not all? I know it's a future dream, but still! I foresee a time when all additions to records will be preceded by a callocaine test, as obviously as they are now preceded by the usual psychotechnical tests. In this way, not only the person concerned's professional skills, but also his or her value as a fellow soldier becomes a matter of public knowledge. I could even fantasize about a mandatory annual calocaine examination of every fellow soldier...
- You don't have any plans for the future, Rissen interjected. But it will be too big a device.
- You are absolutely right, my boss, it will be too big a device. There would be a need for a completely new large bureaucracy with multitudes of employees, all of whom would therefore be drawn from the now established production and military organization. Before such a new order takes place, we must apparently have that increase in the population ready, which we have now propagated for so many years but have not seen the smoke of than. Maybe we can hope for a new great war of conquest, which will make us richer and more productive.
But Rissen shook his head.
- Oh... certainly not, he said. If one only discovers that your plan is the most necessary of all, the only necessary, the only thing that can calm our overpowered - well let's say ga our overwhelming fears, so be sure that the civil service will come to fruition. It will happen - we get to lower our standard of living, we get to increase our work pace, and the great feeling of complete safety and security gets us Look what we're losing.
I wasn't sure if it was serious or ironic. On the one hand, I was ready to burst into a sigh at the thought of a further lowered standard of living. (You are so ungrateful, I thought, you are self-indulgent and selfish, even when it concerns what is greater than the individual's ¶jen.) On the other hand, I felt flattered by the idea that the calocaine could one day play such a role. But before I could answer anything at all, he added in a different tone:
- This much is fairly certain, that it is the last rest of our privacy that is now passing.
- Well, yes, it makes less! I said happily. The collectivity is ready to conquer the last area, where antisocial tendencies could previously take refuge. From what I can see, it simply means that the Great Community is nearing completion.
- The community, he repeated slowly, as if he doubted it.
I never had time to answer. We stood inside the dining room door and had to separate to go to our seats at different tables. We couldn't stop and end our conversation, partly because it would have aroused wonder, partly because we couldn't stand in the way of the fierce straw mm of people who longed for their dinner. But as I went to my seat and sat down, I thought about his doubtful tone and got angry.
He must have known what I meant, it wasn't a free invention of mine, this thing with the community. Every single fellow soldier had to learn as a child the difference between lower and higher life - the lower uncomplicated and undifferentiated, for example the single-celled animals and plants, the higher complicated and manifold differentiated, for example, the human body in its fine and well-functioning composition. Every fellow soldier also had to learn that it was exactly the same with the forms of society: from a planless horde, the body of society had developed into the most highly organized and differentiated of all forms: our present World state. From individualism to collectivism - from solitude to community, such had been the way for this gigantic and sacred organism, in which the individual was just a cell with no other meaning than that it served the whole of the organism. That much every single youth with the children's camp behind him knew, and that much Rissen should also know. Moreover, he should have understood what was not so difficult to understand: that the callocaine was a necessary link in this whole development, because it extended the great community also to the interior, that you used to keep to yourself. Did Rissen really not understand something so logical, or did he not want to understand? because it widened the great community also to the interior, which before was kept to itself. Did Rissen really not understand something so logical, or did he not want to understand? because it widened the great community also to the interior, which before was kept to itself. Did Rissen really not understand something so logical, or did he not want to understand?
I glanced at his table. There he sat with his careless attitude, stirring the soup with a scattered smile. The whole man worried me in a vague way. He was not only strange, unlike others to the point of ridiculousness, he was also strange in a direction where I dimly sensed danger. I still did not know what this danger might consist of, but it drew my reluctant attention to everything he said and did.
Our experiments would continue after dinner, and now it concerned a more complicated trial. I had planned it with a more dubious controller than Rissen in mind, but in any case accuracy was a virtue. My attempts would not stop with the control chief; if he approved them, they would be discussed in many ways within the chemical cities, perhaps also among the capital's lawyers. The subjects we now sent for did not have to be fresh, that was specifically stated; if they were only in their right mind, that was enough. On the other hand, they had to fulfill another condition, one that was very rarely placed on a sent subject: they had to be married.
We had put ourselves in touch with the chief of police by telephone to get permission for this new experiment. Even though we disposed of the employees of the Voluntary Offer Service body and soul, with no other consideration than the best of the State, we did not simply dispose of Over their wives and husbands, as little as over other fellow soldiers. For that, we must have the chief of police's special consent. He was a little reluctant at the beginning, thought it was unnecessary as long as there were freelancers for the profession and certainly never really understood what it was all about, but when we worked him out enough he ¤nge, so that in his haste he began to become unbearable, and convinced him that nothing worse would happen to those left out than terror and a relief nauseated, he finally gave his consent;
The ten requested married quote services were called in at once. In my card system, I not only had to record their number, but also their name and address, which were not on the staff card at all, and that also caused a certain astonishment and anxiety. I had to calm them down and get them into what was coming.
The idea was that they would come home to the spouse and show signs of worry and anxiety, or, if it was easier for them, a certain rosy optimism for the future. Employed, they would finally tell in confidence that they had undertaken espionage. Perhaps a neighbor during a subway ride had whispered in their ear that they could make a lot of money if they would only draw a map of the laboratories around the Voluntary Quotation Service Center, the laboratories and the subways, roughly r as they imagined them. Then it was just a matter of waiting and not for a second betraying that it was about an experiment.
That same evening we went to the police station, duly provided with a certificate of our case from the top manager of our laboratory quarters and with a visitor's license from the police station, sent with Ilbud. I had narrowly had to exchange my military and police service evening for later double service. However, we were happy to get in touch with the chief of police; we needed his help in what we now had before us. In any case, it was quite a bit of work to convince him, not because he generally had a hard time understanding, on the contrary, but because he was in a bad mood and apparently harbored a principled distrust of anyone. I must confess that his distrust made a better impression on me than Rissen's credulity. Although it accidentally spilled over me, it was in order, and when we finally got him over to our side, at least I had the feeling that I had opened a very safe door with the right and legalize the key, not with a bow and not with a kick. - The point was that we had to take care of the persons of the spouses, after they received the trust of their spouses, our subjects. They could easily be reported in legal order, as accomplices in stamping, and detained according to all the rules of the art, only they were then somehow passed on to us. If he wanted to initiate his policemen or preferred to know what it was about alone, that was his business. The only important thing was that the arrested spouses should be examined for calocaine by us. If he wanted, he could control himself, that the detainees did not suffer any harm with us and therefore no public material was needlessly destroyed - he wanted to come in person or send a representative, then it went just as well and we would feel flattered. I think, for the rest, that it was that "in person" that made him more lenient. Despite his bad mood, he was curious about how my invention could work. When we finally got his written confirmation of the previous promise over the phone, with the signature, Vay Karrek, in a tall, pointed but powerful style underneath, we prepared him that some of the unsuspecting spouses could take their side and identify the feigned criminal.
Tired but satisfied with the outcome of the trip, we returned from the police station.
When I got home and into the parents' room - Linda had already gone to bed - a message was waiting on my bedside table. This applied to military and police service: from four evenings a week it was extended to five. For the time being, the authorities therefore felt they had to reduce the family evenings from two to one, while the party and lecture evenings were kept unabated. (The latter was also necessary not only for the fellow soldiers' recreation and upbringing, but also for the State's finances. Where and when would fellow soldiers, who had already left the youth camp , meet each other and fall in love? Linda and I also had those evenings of parties and lectures to thank for our marriage.) - This was a message completely in line with the signs I observed before, and I saw,
All possible matters used to intrude on the family evenings, I knew that from experience. If things went badly, it could be a long time before I had an evening to myself. As it was not yet particularly late and I myself was not as tired as one used to be after nights of duty, I decided to do what else had to happen, so I sat down and wrote the apology I would ask to perform on the radio:
"I, Leo Kall, employed at the 4th chemical city's larger laboratory for organic poisons and anesthetics, experimental department, have an excuse to make.
At the youth camp's farewell party for called-out employees on April 19 this year, I committed a serious misdemeanor. Seized by a false pity, the kind that proceeds from the regret of the individual, and a false heroism, the kind that lingers fondly on the tragic and dark in noise Before the light and joy of life, I gave the following speech. (There the speech was inserted, and it should be read with a slightly ironic tone.) Now the Seventh Bureau of the Ministry of Propaganda has issued the following statement about this speech: Then a wholehearted etc. ( The statement should also be repeated, since it was the most important thing for the listeners, a precedent as it was and a warning to everyone who was on the same path of thought and feeling.
The next morning I asked Linda to read the letter as quickly as possible, and she was satisfied. It was in no way exaggerated, no one could interpret any secret irony, and at the same time you could not accuse it of any stupid false pride. So it was just a matter of writing it off, sending it in and then standing in line to get your turn during the radio's excused hour. The fifth chapter
The experiment immediately took a rather ominous turn. Already very early in the morning we called the police station to hear about something that had happened, and yet we were apparently too late. In no less than nine cases out of ten, the spouses had indicated their spouses. Whether the tenth was perhaps already on its way, it was not good to say - in any case, the arrest warrant was issued, and we could wait for the person in question to our laboratory if two or three hours.
Not exactly bright prospects. I have to admit that I was a little surprised at how loyal beyond the law and how quick in the turnaround all these spouses had turned out to be - only gratifying of course, if only it hadn't worked out The whole experiment. It was certain that the attempt must be repeated. At least we should be able to present some sure cases before the invention could be used by the State.
So we sent for a new group of ten married subjects, and I repeated my little speech from last year. Everything went exactly the same way, the only difference was that everyone was even worse there this time - a couple even came limping on crutches and one with bandage around the whole head. It must be that the married subjects are few in general, and in this particular experiment the crutches meant plus or minus zero - but still! Lately, the lack of test subjects had become increasingly noticeable. Of course, they were consumed over the years, and something had to be done, if the work could at all be continued as before. As soon as they left the room, I burst out:
- But it's a scandal! Soon the staff here will be working hard! We get to experiment with the dying and the insane! Wasn't it about time that the authorities soon launched a campaign again, the kind that our first issue talked about, to fill in the sparse ranks?
- Nothing prevents you from complaining, said Rissen and shrugged his shoulders.
I got an idea. Of course, and rightly so, the authorities could not attach any weight to the complaint of an individual fellow soldier. On the other hand, one could very well start with a collection of names from all the city's laboratories, where test subjects were used and where one must therefore have noticed the lack. I decided to use the first evening when I wasn't too tired, at worst a free evening, to formulate such a letter, which could then be duplicated and sent around to the various institutions. Enterprise of that kind could not possibly be anything other than meritorious, I thought.
The hours before the detainee arrived were spent in a kind of interrogation, which Rissen set in motion, regarding the calocaine and its closest relatives among the preparations from a chemical and medical point of view. He was skilled in his trade, I couldn't deny that. I think I managed the whole thing quite well, and I was surprised that he considered me worthy of such an interrogation at all. Was it his intention to declare me competent for some higher post? Objectively speaking, I sure was, and yet... It seemed to me that he should necessarily have felt my distrust creep up on my skin and responded in kind. . I accepted his kindness with strong inner reservations. What he hoped or demanded of me in the future was impossible to guess. In any case, I didn't intend to be lulled into any false security.
When the appointed time approached, a man in a police uniform stepped in and reported the police chief Karrek himself. So great was his interest! Of course, it was an honor for the whole institution, but especially for me, that such a powerful man showed up for my experiment. With a somewhat ironic face - he probably thought to himself that he exposed his curiosity too shamelessly - he sat down in the chair we put in front of him. A short while later, the detainee was brought in, a rather young, infant and a little frail little woman. Either she must have been unusually white-faced by nature, or the white complexion was also due to tension.
- Have you sent a report to the police? I asked just to be sure.
- No, she said hopefully and became a little more transparent. (She couldn't possibly be paler.)
- And you have nothing to confess either? Rissen asked.
- No! (Now the voice was quite steady again, without a note of surprise.)
- You are accused of complicity in treason. Think about it: has no person close to you mentioned anything about government stamps?
- No! she replied very firmly.
I breathed a sigh of relief. Either it was out of crime or out of sheer laziness that she had failed to report her husband in time - at least now she was reluctant to confess. She was probably scared. Her stern demeanor and clenched expression would under normal circumstances suggest a brave and energetic fellow soldier. Now they gave her a defiant and rebellious look. I nearly choked when I thought of what cunning illusion she hid as a precious secret, and how we were to force it from her—we, who knew, for what it was worth... even more, when one thought of how much ado she had already experienced, driven at extra speed in a sealed carriage on the subway's lowest track, the police and military track, and equipped with gags and handcuffs, also guarded by two policemen - as was the custom, when a traitor was whisked away somewhere. But my little smile never made it to the light of day. Even if the story itself was a lie and the whole investigation a farce - her complicity was at least genuine, and just as criminal whether it was due to malice or carelessness.
When she was put in the chair, she was close to passing out. Presumably she took my innocent laboratory for a torture chamber, where we would now try to force out of her what she did not want to say. While Rissen claimed her fainting, I gave her a syringe, and in silence the three of us waited, the police chief, Rissen and I.
Little could have been expected from this young and frightened subject, who was not even a professional but an amateur, if one may use such an affectionate expression himself a similar crying reaction to No. 135, my first victim. But it turned out to be quite the opposite. The stiff and tense features dissolved slowly, infinitely slowly, into an inwardly childlike clarity. The creases in the heavy forehead were smoothed out. Over the thin cheeks, the protruding cheekbones, surprisingly, an almost happy smile slipped. With a jerk, she straightened up in her chair, opened her eyes wide and took a deep breath. For a long while she sat quietly, until I began to fear that my callocaine would prove unreliable after all.
- No, there is nothing to be afraid of, she finally said in a surprised and relieved tone. - He must know that too. Not pain, not death. Not anything. He knows it. Why wouldn't I say it then? Why didn't I want to talk about this too? Yes of course, he told me about it, last night he talked about it - and now I understand that he knew even then what I have not known just now: that there is nothing to be afraid of. But that he knew it, when he spoke to me. I will never forget it. That he dared. I would never dare. But it is the pride of my life that he dared, and I will be grateful all my life, I will live in gratitude to do the same in return.
- What did he dare? I interjected, eager to get to the point.
- Speak to me. If something I wouldn't dare...
- And what did he talk about then?
- It does the same. It means nothing. Something stupid. Someone who wanted information from him, map sketches, and pay him money for it. He hasn't done it yet. He said he was going to do it, but I don't understand. I would never do that. But that he wanted to talk to me about it - I want to talk to him further. Either he will understand me, or I will also understand him. We will understand each other and shop together when we shop. I'm with him. With him I have nothing to be afraid of. He wasn't afraid of me.
- Map sketches? But don't you know that all attempts to make maps of any kind are strictly prohibited and considered treason?
- Yes - yes, of course I know - I'm saying that I don't understand him, she answered impatiently. But we must understand each other. I him or he me. Then we will shop together. Don't you understand: I have been afraid of him. And he wasn't afraid of me. Because he spoke about this. And he has no reason either. He will never get any reason. Never. I realized that was what I had...
- So, I interrupted with a fierceness, for which I really had no basis, so: he had agreed with someone to sell map sketches. What kind of map sketches?
- Over the laboratories, she answered indifferently. But I realized that's what I had...
- And you knew it was treason? And that it was complicity in treason that you didn't report him?
- Yes Yes. But the second was more important…
- Do you know anything about the man who wanted the map sketches?
- I asked, but he didn't know much himself. He sat next to him on the subway and said he would show up again, but wouldn't say where and when, just that he would pay then, when he got the sketches. Before that we must have come to an agreement...
- That's enough, this, I said, half turning to Rissen, half to the chief of police. We have managed to get out of her all the information the man had been tasked to provide. The rest is unimportant.
- It's really interesting, said the police chief. Extremely interested. Would you really get people to be so open with such simple means? But you must forgive me, that I am of a skeptical nature. Of course, I completely trust your honor and accuracy, of course, completely. And yet I would like to be there a couple more times. Don't get it wrong, fellow soldiers. That the police are interested in your invention is reasonable.
With the greatest joy we welcomed him when he wished and at the same time took the opportunity to hand him the list of the new subjects. Shouldn't that group be exposed to as much manspilling as the previous one! I thought. Scarcely had the thought become conscious to me, before I was filled with terror: here I stood, therefore, wishing that a certain number of people would be treacherously minded fellow soldiers... Rissen's words you stand up for me: no fellow soldier over forty has a good conscience. And immediately I erupted into violent dislike for Rissen, as if it had been him who had forced me into a state-hostile wish. In a way, maybe I was right - not that my wish itself was his work - but that without his words I might never have thought of the opposite.
The woman in the chair moved with a squeal, and Rissen handed her the camphor glass.
Suddenly she ran up with a scream. She crouched in terror, put her hands over her mouth and began to wail loudly. She had come to the point when she regained her senses and realized what she had done.
The sight was horrible and sad, but still filled me with a certain satisfaction. Just now, when she sat there in that childlike carelessness, I had against my will breathed deeper and more calmly than usual. She radiated a kind of rest, which reminded me of sleep - I don't even know for the rest if I myself usually rest like that when I sleep, much less when I'm awake permission. There she had sat and thought she was at peace with someone else, with her husband - and he had already betrayed her, he had betrayed her from the beginning - and now she had betrayed him too without meaning to. As unreal as his crime had been, just as unreal was her security just now, and just as unreal was her terror now. I came to think of the Fata Morgana, which the desert wanderer sees above the salt crusts: palm trees, oases, springs - at worst he bends down, drinks from the salt pools and perishes. That's what she had done, I thought, and that's always the drink we sip from antisocial, individual sentimental sources. An illusion, a dangerous illusion.
It struck me that she should be told the whole truth, not to escape her wild remorse, but to realize the complete nothingness of the brief security she harbored.
- Calm down, I said. You have no reason to complain, at least not for your husband's sake. Mark what I say now: your husband has never met that fellow. He is completely innocent. He has told the whole story on our behalf. It was an experiment - with you!
She stared at me and didn't seem to understand.
- The whole spy story is a lie, I repeated and couldn't suppress a sneer, although I didn't really think it was anything to sneer at. Your husband's confidence yesterday was no confidence. He was acting on orders.
For a moment it looked like she was going to pass out again, but then she stiffened and straightened up. There she stood thin and petrified in the middle of the floor without taking a step forward or back. I had nothing more to say to her, but couldn't take my eyes off her. As she now stood there, closed and frozen like a dead thing, without a drop left of her happy security just now, she aroused a fierce pity in me. It was a weakness to be ashamed of, but it was too strong for me. I forgot the chief of police, I forgot Rissen, and I was flooded with a vague desire to let her understand that I felt the way she did now... Out of this little I woke up in the last second of sleep, when the chief of police said:
- I believe that the woman should still be detained. The betrayal itself was certainly feigned, but the complicity was as real as it could be. On the other hand, we can't pass judgments outright, but it has to be arranged a bit more legally.
- Impossible! cried Rissen, confused. Consider that it is an experiment, that it applies to our employees, or rather their spouses...
- How could I take that into account? Karrek asked laughing.
For once, I was completely on Rissen's side.
- Such an arrest will come out unconditionally, I said, even if we fire her husband and employ him elsewhere - which is difficult enough with tender servants, reduced to health as they are - even then the story comes out, and the new recruitment in the profession, which is already so bad before, will probably drop catastrophically. I beg you, for the sake of it all, let that detention be!
- You exaggerate, answered Karrek. The story certainly doesn't need to come out. Why would her husband be employed elsewhere? He can very well have an accident on the way home.
- It cannot be your intention to take from us one of our few and precious test subjects, I replied plaintively. As far as the woman is concerned, she is no longer dangerous: another time she will not accept confidences so lightly. For the rest, I added with a sudden whim, if you arrest our subject, that means you've already made calocaine a legal drug, and that you were too early, my boss...
The chief of police narrowed his eyes into narrow slits, smiled pointedly and yet kindly and said as one speaks to a child:
- If you look at it, you have the gift of speech and logic. For the sake of the laboratory, I am donating after my arrest, I have no personal interest in it. I must go now (he looked at his watch), but I will come again to new experiments.
He left, and the woman was released from her handcuffs and released. For both the laboratory's sake and hers, I breathed a sigh of relief. When she was led out, she walked stiffly like a sleepwalker, and for the second time she chased a horrible thought through my brain: if I had miscalculated again , if my callocaine should turn out to have the same bad after-effects as its predecessor, perhaps not always, but on especially sensitive nervous systems? But I calmed down, and none of my bad premonitions kicked in. Through her husband, I later learned that she seemed completely normal, if somewhat more bound than before. But she has always been bound, he added.
When we were alone again, Rissen said:
- There you had the germ of a different kind of community.
- Community? I asked hopefully. How so?
- At her, the woman.
- Uh…! I said, increasingly surprised. But that kind of community - yes, you're right, my boss, a germ of community you might call it - but no more either! That kind of community already existed during the Stone Age! In our day it is a rudiment, and a harmful rudiment. isn't that so?
- Hm, he just said.
- But this case was just a school example of where it leads, if the individuals are too firmly attached to each other! I pleaded, touchingly. Then the most important bond of all, the bond to the State, is easily broken!
- Hm, he said again. And a moment later: Maybe it wasn't so stupid to live in the Stone Age.
- A matter of taste, of course. If you prefer everyone's fight against everyone to the well-organized state, built on mutual help - then maybe it was really nice to live in the Stone Age. Actually, it's a funny thought, that there are Neanderthals in our midst...
I probably meant him, but I got scared when I said it, so I added:
- I mean, of course, that woman. It seemed as though he turned away so as not to show that he was smiling. Strange what can get out of someone completely without calocaine, I thought. The sixth chapter
When I got home after the end of the working day, the porter told me that someone had applied for a temporary above-ground license in the district in order to meet me in person. I stared at the name. Kadidja Kappori. Unknown. At least I couldn't remember hearing it before. The porter hadn't really understood her case on the phone, he thought it was about a divorce. Extremely mysterious! In the end, I was so curious that I defied all caution and signed the paper, that I was willing to receive her and when I could receive. I made sure that the porter also signed, that he took note of the invitation and would check the time for the visit, then it was just a matter of handing everything over to the district controller, and he wrote out the visit kslicense and sent it to the person concerned.
Then Linda and I threw in the food and went to the military service separately. It turned out to have been expanded not only quantitatively but also qualitatively. During the next few days, I came to regard working hours as the least demanding part of the day, while my most demanding task was the evening shift, including the night, which was also very often was spent in arms. I was happy that my invention was finished. Had I been a little slower, it would probably never have reached its completion, at least if my evenings were henceforth always to pass as now. With such strenuous hours behind me, I would try in vain to gather my thoughts to full sharpness. Now, fortunately, it was only about the last practical application, and it went off just like speed, especially as Rissen's presence kept me awake. You could tell that he was also quite tired, but since he was much older, he wasn't teased quite as hard, and in any case I never caught him with some mistake.
However, the experiments seemed to have hit a dead end, solely for the sake of the many indications. We had to redo them litter by litter and in the meantime continue with the same attempt as during the first day.
When we redid them for the third time without a single husband or wife delaying long enough with their statement to be arrested - and what trouble it was to gather married subjects, it's indescribable, the last time we had to wait three days, before we got enough numbers together - finally fell in my free evening of the week , and no pleasure could have attracted more seductively than the idea of ​​being allowed to go to bed a couple of hours earlier than what is usually meant by bedtime. The children had already gone to sleep, the housekeeper had left, I had set the alarm clock and stretched one last time before I was going to start undressing, when the doorbell rang. the doorbell.
- Kadidja Kappori! I immediately thought, cursing my attendant, who made me sign that unnecessary request for a visit. The worst thing was that I was completely alone. Linda had had to take her evening off for a meeting of a committee, which was preparing a party in honor of the now retired manager of all the city's food factories as well as the new , who would take up the post after her.
When I opened the door, an elderly woman was standing outside, big and rough and with a not too intelligent face.
- Fellow soldier Leo Kall? she asked. I am Kadidja Kappori, and you have been kind enough to grant me a call.
- I am very sorry, but I happen to be alone at home, I said, and therefore cannot be on duty. It pains me if you may have traveled long distances just this evening, but you know that there have been several provocations, where the accused found it extremely difficult to prove his innocence, because there were no witnesses and the police happened to not pay attention to that particular room...
- But there is no question of that, she said imploringly. I assure you, that I come with the most open intentions.
- Of course, I don't distrust you personally, I replied, but admit myself, that anyone can say so. In any case, the safest thing for me is not to let you in. I don't know you, and nobody knows what you could find to say about me.
I had been speaking quite loudly all the time to emphasize my innocence to the neighbors. It was this that gave her an idea.
- Couldn't it be possible to call in some of the neighbors as witnesses? she asked. Although I admit that I would probably prefer to talk to you alone.
Undeniably a solution. I rang the nearest door. There lived a staff physician at the Experimental Laboratories' canteens; I just didn't know more about him than what he looked like and that he and his wife sometimes argued a little too loudly for the thin partition walls in the house. When I called, he opened the door himself with furrowed brows, and I presented my case. The frown slowly smoothed out, he began to look interested and finally agreed. He too was alone at home. For a moment I regretted it and wondered if this was well-intentioned, but there was really no reason to believe that he would be in some kind of plot with Kadidja Kappori.
Then they both stepped into the parents' room, where I hastily folded up the already made bed, so that it would be a little better place and seem a little more locker room
- Of course you don't know who I am, she began. The thing is, I am married to Togo Bahara at the Voluntary Quotation Service.
My heart sank in me, although I tried to stop my reluctance. So she was one of the loyal fellow soldiers who ruined my experiment for me. She had probably come here to indicate her husband. Why she turned to me instead of directly to the police, I admittedly did not understand. Maybe she sensed owls in the bog? Or she also thought it was less brutal to report him to his boss. Anyway, it was impossible for me to stop her now, as I had already let her in and the doctor was sitting there as a witness.
- Something terribly sad has happened at home, she continued with downcast eyes. The other day my husband came home and told me something horrible, the most horrible thing of all, treason. I couldn't believe my ears. For over twenty years we have been together, brought several children into the world, so I thought I always knew him. Yes, he has had his periods of nervous irritability and despondency, but that is understandable in the profession. I myself am a laundress at Centralvätten in the district, and we have also got our home there. But that doesn't strictly belong here. But you understand that I probably thought I knew him. Not that we've ever spoken that much to each other, you've been married for a couple of years, so you know roughly what you have to say, so then you might as well leave it unsaid. But it's as if you still felt what the other wanted and meant, when you go there and larvae in two rooms together and keep with it for over twenty years. You don't really think about him, no more than about your own hand, but it would be awfully strange if the hand one tu three was a foot or went off by itself .. .And then it comes like this! At first I thought: fools! Togo can't have done that. But then I said to myself: No one should be too sure, and haven't we heard that both on the radio and in lectures, and haven't we ¥tt on placards both in the metro and on the streets: NO ONE CAN BE SAFE! THE ONE NEAREST TO YOU CAN BE A GUIDE! I hadn't attached myself to it before, I didn't think it applied to me. But what I went through in just one night I can't say. Had my hair not been gray before, it probably would have been that night. It was so impossible to imagine that Togo, my Togo, was a traitor. But what do traitors look like? Don't they look like regular people? It's just inside they're different. Otherwise it wouldn't be art. And that they pretend to be like others, it goes without saying, it shows just how sneaky they are. Well, then I lay down and redid Togo for me. And when I woke up in the morning, he certainly wasn't human anymore in my eyes. NO ONE SHOULD BE SAFE! THE ONE NEAREST TO YOU CAN BE A GUIDE! He was no longer human, he was worse than a wild animal. For a moment I thought it was a terrible dream - there he was, shaving just like usual - and I thought, that if I could get him to think better, then everything would be as usual again. But then I thought, that's not how you do it with traitors, because they don't get better, and just listening to someone like that can be dangerous enough. He is spoiled inside. So I called the police as soon as I got to work, it was the only thing I could do now that he was the way he was. I thought of course they would arrest him at once, and when he came home in the evening as usual, I went and waited for the police at any moment. He noticed that, and then he said: You have reported me to the police. You wouldn't have done that. It was an experiment, and now you've ruined it all. - But tell me now, how could I believe him right away then? How could I believe that he was human again? When I finally understood that it was true - yes, then I wanted to fall on his neck in delight, but imagine that then he was evil. And then he wanted a divorce.
- It was quite remarkable, was all I could say.
She swallowed and swallowed so as not to embarrass herself by crying.
- Yes, I want to keep him, she continued. And I think it's unfair that he should want a divorce, when I haven't done anything wrong.
It was true, she was right. She should not be punished for acting as a good and reliable fellow soldier, she should be rewarded. She should be allowed to keep her Togo.
- He didn't think he could trust me anymore, she continued through many swallows. It is quite clear that he can trust me, when he is human. And it is just as clear that not a traitor can trust me, Kadidja Kappori.
The image of the torn woman's bedraggled face came to mind with a wistful hopelessness. What an immature and senseless demand to want to have one's own person to trust, purely personally to trust regardless of what one undertakes! I have to admit to myself that there was a sleeping allure in it. The infant and the stone age savage may not only live on in some, I thought, but in all of us, although more and less, there is an essential difference. And as much as I felt it a task to crush the pale woman's dream, I also grasped the necessity of crushing the same illusion in Kadidja Kappori's husband, even if it would happen with the sacrifice of another free evening.
- Come back to me both during one of these times, I said and wrote down my free hours on a piece of paper. If he doesn't change, he should learn better from me.
She took her leave with many thanks, and I followed both her and the doctor out the door. The doctor seemed to take the matter as a public amusement, he had been sitting and chuckling all the time, which was actually disturbing, and was still chuckling, while he disappeared into himself. So now I couldn't take it. I saw the principled meaning of the matter too clearly for me to really be interested in the ridiculous people involved.
I couldn't resist telling the story to Rissen during laboratory hours. Actually, it didn't belong to the work, but at least it had a general meaning. I also strongly suspect that I was driven by a certain desire to show myself interesting and independent, such a man that others looked up to in their difficulties and who light and playful helped them to the right. It was the case that as hard as I criticized Rissen and as deeply as I distrusted him, his reputation was just as important to me. Every time I found myself trying to impress him, I was ashamed of myself and dismissed my weakness. But after a quarter of an hour it was there again, and I did everything I could to force some kind of respect from this strange man, whom no one could have respect for.
Among other things, there was talk of Kadidja Kappori's words: "He wasn't human anymore."
- Human! I said. Such a mystery people have built up around that word! As if it was in and of itself something worthy of respect, that you are human! Human! It is a biological concept. Where it is something else, it was best to abolish it as soon as possible.
Rissen just looked at me with a hard expression.
- For example now Kadidja Kappori, I continued. In order to act rightly, she must first get rid of the inhibitions that lie in the superstitious notion that her husband was a "man", with quotation marks, because biologically he could never in time become anything else. She managed that crisis in one night, but how many people do that? A little slower in the turn, then she would have found herself among the state traitors without even knowing how it had happened, all for the sake of that superstition... I think it is necessary to start from the beginning and teach people to see the "man", with quotation marks, in the fellow soldier.
- I don't think there are that many who are victims of that kind of mystery, said Rissen slowly, as he stood and kept his eye next to a measuring glass, which he had just filled.
It wasn't that remarkable said and nothing to comment on either. But he had a way of dropping his words into one's ears, as if there was a lot behind it. It made you always wonder what he had said, and his words, with voice and tone, came back and worried you.
Otherwise, that particular week was so full of exciting events that you forgot everything else for them. They were even so important that they became the beginning of the callocaine's victory train through the World State. But I save them to finish the story of the Bahara-Kappori couple.
They came to me exactly one week after Kadidja Kappori's first visit. Linda was again busy with her preparatory committee, but since I was now sure of both their intentions and knew that I could at least keep him in check, I did not bother to summon some witnesses. Both looked sour and dejected, so it was clear that no reconciliation had yet taken place.
- Well, I said to help them on the trot (it was best to take it all in good humour), well, it seems that the extra compensation had been well taken that time, fellow soldier Bahara. A divorce can then actually almost be called a lasting but. That crutch for the rest - is it acquired in the work, or is it - um - an expression of the marital situation?
He didn't answer, just sat and looked pissed off. The wife supported him:
- You should at least answer your boss, little Togo! Yes, imagine being married for twenty years and then going to hell and getting divorced for this! It's probably unfair, first come and trick someone with an experiment and then get angry before you draw the consequences!
- If you could put me in prison, then you can get rid of me if I go free too, the man answered bluntly.
- It's not the same! she objected. If you were the one you tried to imagine me, then save me well to have you in the house! But when you're not, when you're actually who I've known for twenty years, then it's clear that I want you to stay! And I haven't done anything wrong that would deserve you leaving me.
- Do you want to answer me, fellow soldier Bahara, I said, in a less joking tone this time. Do you really think that your wife did something wrong when she reported you?
- Bad, I don't know exactly...
- What would you do if someone came and told you that he was a spy?... You don't need to hesitate too long about that, I hope. Shall I tell you what to do? Go straight to the nearest mailbox, or call the nearest phone, and report him as soon as possible. Right? Wouldn't you do that?
- Yes - yes, of course - but it's not quite the same.
- I am glad that you would do it, because otherwise you would be a criminal. That is exactly what your wife has also done. What do you mean it's not quite the same?
He had a hard time clarifying that. There were some tentative attempts:
- That she can really immediately believe anything about me... After twenty years! From one day to the next! And for the rest: imagine if I really came to her one day and had done something stupid and didn't know any living advice...
- Then it would be too late to regret it then. And as for believing anything - don't you know it's our duty to be suspicious? The welfare of the state demands it. Twenty years is a long time, it's true, but you can be wrong for twenty years. No, you have nothing to complain about.
- No - but if she - - not I would - -
- Watch your tongue, dear fellow soldier, you could easily destroy my good opinion of your honor. Your wife indicated a spy. Was it right or wrong?
- Yes - yes - it was probably right.
- So: it was right. She indicated a spy, but that spy was not you. And now you want to divorce her because she was right about someone who wasn't you. Is it rhyme and reason?
- But - it feels - sort of so insecure - when I look at her and don't know what she thinks about me.
- If I were like you, I would be careful not to divorce my wife for the reason that she has done the right thing. Regardless of the fact that your profession does not attract women to you - and neither does your condition, for that matter - no honest woman will reflect on you when she learns this story - and that it comes out, I dare to be responsible for - so then you have to go there with a stain on you, which everyone is talking about.
- But I don't like it here, mumbled the man more and more confused. I don't want it like this.
- You really surprise me, I said with an increasingly cold voice. Am I not to believe that you are an antisocial type? You know what, we really have to keep that thing in mind in the laboratory. It might not be so fun to get such a stamp on yourself.
It took. His confusion took on a new note of horror. Helplessly, he turned his rigid eyes from his wife to me and back again. After a short pause I repeated:
- But I'm sure you didn't mean that badly. You wanted to be sure that your wife had also given up her suspicions seriously. She has, you can see that now. So there is no reason for divorce anymore? Am I right?
- Y-yeah, he admitted, relieved by my kindness, although he couldn't quite follow the train of thought. Of course. There are no reasons then - for divorce.
The wife, on the other hand, immediately understood that the danger was now averted and everything as before, beamed with great relief. Her gratitude had to be my only reward for two sacrificed free evenings. Togo Bahara's trumped cold did bother me, but it would wear off little by little. To help him on the trot, I called after them:
- Then you can come and report for me, if your husband really meant what he said, or if he is still an antisocial type in the end!
Bahara knew I was his boss. Kadidja Kappori's marriage was saved. Seventh chapter
Just that week our experiments had turned out unusually favourably. No less than three of the ten-man group were missing among those listed, and fortunately the police had also quickly set about the arrest; so we had three outsiders and unsuspecting people at our disposal. Chief of Police Karrek himself attended the investigation. Tall and lean, he settled into the chair, stretched his long legs straight in front of him, clasped his hands over his slender torso, and waited with a secret fire in the eye slits. The chief of police was a strange person, one who seemed born to go far. His demeanor could be as lax and laxer than Rissen's, and yet he never seemed unmilitary. While Rissen was lifted on his own impulses and seemed to drive rather than rule, Karrek's slumped rest was just the set before the leap, and in the tightly closed face, in the glitter behind his half-closed eyelids, you could read that it was going to be a wild animal leap, which did not fail his goal. Not only did I respect his strength, I also placed my hope in his power. It would soon turn out that I was right there.
The three detainees were brought in one by one and examined. Two of them were of a kind that we have not had to deal with so far, common criminal types, who were simply overwhelmingly attracted by the sums the spy was said to have promised. One of them, a woman, cheered up both us and the chief of police with her intimate beliefs about the man's nature and habits. An intelligent woman, and witty, but not an undesirable fellow-soldier, with the most compact individual selfishness.
The third, on the other hand, gave us something to think about.
Why he had not indicated his wife was shrouded in obscurity, apparently also to himself. On the one hand, he showed no such ecstatic gratitude for his wife's trust as the little pale woman we had before, and on the other he had no interest in the promised sums either. Although he did not directly deny all possibilities that the wife could be a spy, he was apparently not sure that everything was really the way she told. All in all, one could perhaps say that a certain stubbornness had prevented him - a stubbornness that he might have overcome a couple of days later, it was impossible to know. If Karrek hadn't already decided to let anything go to court, that arrogance alone would have labeled him as a danger to the state. While such a loj man rallied to action, could the whole betrayal have already been carried out and the damage done, but not only that, but his whole hesitation also testified to an incredibly low devotion to the State. So it didn't come as a surprise when he let slip, among other things:
- All that is still so much less important than our cause.
I pricked up my ears, and I saw that the chief of police did the same.
- Your business? I asked. Who are you then?
He shook his head with a slightly silly smile.
- Don't ask, he said. We have no name, no organization. We just exist.
- How do you exist, how can you call yourselves we, if you have neither name nor organization? What are you?
- Many, many. But I don't know many. I've seen many, but I don't even know what most of them are called. Why would we need to know that? We know that we are.
Since he was already showing signs of waking up, I looked questioningly first at Rissen, then at the chief of police.
- For everything in the world, go on, Karrek muttered between his teeth. Rissen also made an affirmative statement. So I gave the man another syringe.
- Now further: the names of those you know?
Completely happy and innocent, without the slightest hesitation, he listed five names. That was all, he claimed. He didn't know more. Karrek motioned for Rissen to write them down carefully, which he did.
- And what kind of upheaval do you want to carry out?
Despite the injection, he did not respond. He squirmed under the question and visibly strained, but couldn't get anything out. For a moment I thought again, that maybe under certain circumstances the callocaine could be without effect, and felt how the cold sweat started to seep out. But the question could also be badly posed, too complicated - although everyone should know, it seemed simple enough to me - so that even in the awake state the subject could not have answered it.
- You want something, don't you? I asked cautiously.
- Yes, yes of course, of course we want something...
- And then what?
Silence again. Then, with both hesitation and effort:
- We want to be - - we want to be - - something else - -
- So? And what do you want to be? Silence. A deep sigh.
- Any specific positions that you want to fill?
- No no. Not so.
- You want to be something other than fellow soldiers in the World State?
- N - n - no - - yes that means - - no, not like that - -
I was confused. Then Chief of Police Karrek drew his legs together with a soundless movement, stretched himself over his own clenched hands, squinted his eyes and said with a lie, through whispering voice:
- Where did you meet the others?
- At home with one of them I don't know.
- Where? And when?
- District RQ - Wednesday two weeks ago - -
- How many there?
- Fifteen twenty.
- Then it won't be so difficult to check where it was, Karrek turned to Rissen and me. The gatekeeper should know about it.
And he continued the questioning:
- You had licenses, of course? Was it under a false name?
- Not under a false name. At least my license was genuine.
- So much easier then. Now further. What was discussed?
But there even Karrek bit. The interrogator's answer became confused and uncertain.
We have to leave the wiry fellow alone, all the more so as the second syringe was already starting to wear off. He woke up with severe nausea. Personally, he didn't seem to be bothered too much, he was worried but not despairing, hope more than shame.
As he disappeared through the door, the chief of police sprang up to his full elastic length, breathed deeply, as if venting, and said:
- There will be work here. The man knew nothing, that much is certain. The cronies will know more. We can find our way from name to name right into the innermost circles. Maybe a regular grand conspiracy, who knows?
He closed his eyes, and a look of satisfaction swept across his tight features. I guessed what he was thinking: This will carry my reputation throughout the World State. - Maybe I guessed wrong. The chief of police and I were very different natures.
- For the rest, the police chief continued slowly and looked tentatively from one to the other, for the rest I'm leaving in a little while. It is possible that you will also soon be called to another location. In any case, get ready to travel. The summons can come at home or at work. For safety's sake, have a packed bag with you to the laboratory, so you don't have to delay getting it, a small bag with the most necessary things, so ¥ you can stay away for a few days. And have devices ready, so you can take them with you and show how your calocaine works.
- And the military service? Rissen asked.
- If something happens, it goes without saying that I will arrange everything. If I can't do that, well, then nothing will come of it. I promise nothing. And what will you be up to in the next few days?
- Continue with new and new experiments.
- Is there any obstacle to you taking up this thread? I mean the one we got from the last examinee. Instead of using the Voluntary Quotation Service, you untangle inch by inch the tangle of names he gave you a piece of, carefully write down everything that comes up and wait for Other things. What do you say about that?
Rissen thought about it.
- In the laboratory's regulations there is nothing about such a case.
The chief of police laughed an indescribably insulting laugh in falsetto.
- We must not be bureaucratic, he said. Now if there is an order from the first laboratory director - it's Muili, isn't it - then you don't stick so strictly to the regulations anymore, I think. I go directly to Muili myself. Then it's just a matter of handing in all the names at the Police Station. Maybe it applies to the World State's fortunes and woes - and you ask for the regulations!
He left, and we looked at each other. I suspect my gaze was both triumphant and full of admiration. In the hands of a man like Karrek, you could safely leave your fate. He consisted only of will, for him there were no difficulties.
But Rissen raised his eyebrows in resignation.
- We will become a subdivision of the police, he said. Goodbye, science.
It clicked in me. I loved my scientific work and would miss it very much if I got rid of it. But Rissen was a pessimist by nature, I told myself. For my part, I only saw the Staircase in front of me, and the first and only question was whether it led upwards. Time had to tell the rest.
An hour later, very real orders came from the first laboratory manager, that we should rearrange our work along the lines indicated by the police chief. The police station had already been informed, we just had to call in the names of those we wanted arrested, and the people in question would be at our disposal within twenty-four hours.
The first person we took care of was a young man with youth camp not too far behind him and with a funny mixture of insecurity and humble enthusiasm for the social life he still did not feel fully fitted in. Under the influence of the callocaine, his sense of self was allowed to expand in a way that seemed somewhat comical to us grown men, and he lived tried to entertain us with wide-ranging and rather undetermined plans for the future. At the same time, he admitted that he used to feel deeply troubled by the people around him. They wanted him badly, he claimed. - Admittedly, I myself had suggested that we should let our subjects speak for themselves as much as possible, since the previous case had been so harsh ¥gat,
- Yes. We are colleagues.
- Have you ever met him outside of work?
- Yes. He invited me to a function...
- In the district RQ? Fourteen days ago on Wednesday?
The young man began to chuckle and at the same time seemed very interested.
- Yes. Such a funny event. But I liked them. In a way I liked them...
- Can you tell me what you remember?
- Sure. It was so strange like that. I came in, and there were only people I didn't know. Well, it was nothing strange. If you sacrifice a free evening for social life, it is usually to discuss something, something related to one's work or something else, a planned party or a letter to the authorities or something, and then it is so clear that you do not know everyone who is invited. But it was nothing like that! They didn't discuss at all. They sat and talked about everything possible, or they were also silent. That they were so silent, it made me heartbroken. And for the rest, just as they greeted! They grabbed each other's hands. Is that wise! It must be unhygienic, and so intimate that one is ashamed, moreover. Touching each other's bodies like that, on purpose! They claimed it was an ancient greeting, which they had revived, but you didn't have to do it, if you didn't want to, you didn't have to do anything. But in the beginning I was afraid of them. Nothing is as nasty as sitting and being quiet. You have a feeling that people are looking through you. As if you were naked or worse than naked. Spiritually naked. Especially when there are older people involved, because they may have had time to learn to see through one, for the rest if they talk too, they have had time to learn talk to the surface and be on guard below the surface. It has already happened to me that I have also been able to do that, talk to the surface and be on my guard under the surface, and then you feel happy afterwards, as if you had avoided a danger. But there I couldn't. None of them would take it. When they spoke, they spoke softly, and it seemed as if they were thinking of nothing else at the time. Otherwise, I think it is better to speak loudly, so you capture the attention of others, you speak loudly and have your thoughts with you elsewhere. But they were so weird. In the end I thought it was nice and started to like them. It was calm in a way.
This was not very informative. The young man was a novice in the movement and not yet initiated into the secrets. Just to be sure, I also asked:
- Did you see if there was a manager for the group? Any degrees?
- No - not as I saw. Not like someone said either.
- And what did they do for the rest? Did they talk about something they had done or were going to do?
- Not that I know of. Although I had to go earlier of course, me and a couple more, who hadn't been there before either, I think. Then I don't know what they had in mind. But when we left, someone said: When we meet out in the world, we recognize each other. - I can't explain it, but it was actually really solemn, and I really thought I would recognize them - not exactly those I met there, but anyone who belonged them. There was something special about them, I can't describe it. When I came into this room, I knew for sure that you didn't belong there (he nodded at me). But you (he gave Rissen a misty look), I'm not so sure about you. Maybe you belong there and maybe not. I only know that I felt calmer with them than with others. I didn't have that feeling so clearly,
I looked sharply at Rissen. As stunned as he looked, I thought it probably too likely that he was innocent, if by innocent you meant that he had never participated in such secret meetings as the young man described. Still, there was something in the hint. Rissen also had the same antisocial blood, a kinship with blind moles.
The young man awoke with a commotion, which was not in reasonable proportion to the rather harmless things he uncovered. From what I could understand, his anguish did not concern the story of the gathering, but the purely personal confessions, which we had interrupted with a yawn.
- I think I have to take some back, he mumbled, as he stood and staggered on the floor. The thing where I said that I was insecure for others, that wasn't really true. I just wonder what they think of me. I don't mean that they necessarily wish me ill. And all that I said I wanted to stay and do, it was pure fantasy, not an iota of truth. For the rest, it was also an exaggeration, that I enjoyed myself better with those strange people than with the usual ones. I think I'm basically better with regular ones, when I think about it...
- We are also convinced of that, said Rissen kindly. In the future you should probably stick to the others, the regular ones. We have a strong suspicion that the association you joined so unexpectedly is hostile to the state. You are still apparently quite uncontaminated, but beware! Before you know it, they have you in their nets.
The young man looked terrified as he disappeared through the door.
I don't know what horrible plans we really expected to reveal from the meeting that took place since the youth and such that he was sent home from the gathering. At least one of the detainees should have been there when they were forged. Thoroughly and systematically we questioned the four who still remained, carefully recorded their stories, but it was a long time before we arrived at something so close image of the secret league. Many times we have to look at each other and shake our heads. Was it a collection of lunatics we were dealing with? I had rarely heard of anything more fantastic.
Mainly we were on the lookout for the organization itself, the names of the managers, the branch. But time and time again we were told that there were no managers, no organization. Now, it is often the case in secret conspiracies that members of lower ranks do not know more central secrets; all they know are the names of two or three other members, as insignificant as themselves. We agreed that it was such members that we caught. Nevertheless, we would surely from some of those already captured come over to new layers, then r one knew more. It was just a matter of continuing.
What had happened since the novices left the house? we asked ourselves next. A woman gave us an astonishing description.
- You take out a knife, she said. One of us leaves it to someone else and lies down on a bed and pretends to sleep.
- Well, and then?
- Then there is nothing more. If someone else wants to join, and there is room for it, he can also pretend to sleep. You can sit down and rest your head against the edge of the bed. Or against the table or whatever.
I'm afraid I let out a stifled laugh. The scene that was imagined was too priceless. Someone is sitting there gravely with a large table knife in his hand (of course it was a table knife, it was the easiest thing to come by, you just forgot to leave it in the dinner counter), in the middle of an equally serious company. One has stretched out on the bed with his hands on his stomach, closing his eyes convulsively, maybe even trying to snore. One after the other pulls a pillow and places it nearby, tilts his head in a more or less uncomfortable position and drags his little log to the stack. Someone slides down into a sitting position, along the edge of the bed, stretches his legs in front of him, rests his neck against the wooden frame, yawns to - - Otherwise dead silence.
Not even Rissen could suppress a small smile.
- And what is the meaning of this? he asked.
- A symbolic meaning. Through the knife, he has surrendered to the other's violence, and still nothing happens to him.
(Nothing happens to him yet! When there are lots of people around, who snore wide awake and can blink their left eye at any moment! Nothing happens to him, now is one of his guests - fully legally registered by the porter - clasps his hand around a table knife, with which at dinner they tried in vain to cut the horseradish, and listens to how lifelike he snores...)
- And what will it serve, all that?
- We want to evoke a new spirit, answered the woman quite seriously.
Rissen cupped his chin thoughtfully. At state history lectures, I had heard, and Rissen was sure too, that the savages of ancient times used to utter certain incantations and perform certain so-called magical acts to evoke imaginary beings, which they called spirits. And that kind of thing still happened in our days?
From the same woman we got some hints of a complete fool, who seemed to play a certain role as a hero in their circle. It really doesn't take much for someone to be a hero to some.
- Don't you know Reor? she asked. No, he's not alive now, he lived like that fifty years ago, in one of the mill towns some say, but others say in one of the textile towns . Imagine not having heard of Reor. I would like to give a lecture on Reor sometime. Although it is true, only the initiated can understand. If you want to talk about Reor, you have to turn to the insiders. He went about here and there, because in those days it was different with licenses, and some received him out of fear, because they thought he belonged to the police, and others chased him away, because r they thought he was a criminal. But the one who received him - well, everyone didn't understand what he was like, some just thought he was strange, but others felt that they could be safe and calm with him like a small child with their mother. Some forgot him, but others never forgot him, and they told about him as best they could. But only the initiated understand that. He never locked his door. He never cared for any witnesses or proof of anything he said or did. He didn't even protect himself against thieves and robbers, so he was also robbed in the end, by someone who thought Reor had a cake in his bag. There were times of famine then. But he had none, he had already eaten it together with some others he had met on the way... But the other thought he had saved it. Then he killed him. He never cared for any witnesses or proof of anything he said or did. He didn't even protect himself against thieves and robbers, so he was also robbed in the end, by someone who thought Reor had a cake in his bag. There were times of famine then. But he had none, he had already eaten it together with some others he had met on the way... But the other thought he had saved it. Then he killed him. He never cared for any witnesses or proof of anything he said or did. He didn't even protect himself against thieves and robbers, so he was also robbed in the end, by someone who thought Reor had a cake in his bag. There were times of famine then. But he had none, he had already eaten it together with some others he had met on the way... But the other thought he had saved it. Then he killed him.
- And yet you mean that he was a great man? I asked.
- He was a big man. Reor was a great man. He was one of us. There are still those who have seen him.
Rissen looked at me meaningfully and shook his head.
- The most expensive logic I have heard in my life, I said. Let us be like him, before he was robbed! I don't understand any of this.
- You talked about inauguration, Rissen said to the woman without attaching himself to me. How do you become initiated?
- I do not know. You just become it. Just as it is, so you are. The others feel it, those who are also initiated.
- So anyone can come and claim that he is initiated? Surely there must be some action, some ceremony - some secrets that are communicated?
- No, nothing like that. It shows, I say. You get it, you understand, or you don't get it - some never get it.
- How does it feel then?
- Yes - it is felt on everything - - - that with the knife and the sleep and it becomes sacred and clear for one then - - and much else - - -
We were as wise as before.
Whether the woman was crazy on her own or whether all those people shared her madness was hard to tell. That much was certain that the magical rites with the knife and the pretended sleep had apparently taken place, we got confirmation from the others, on the other hand it remained obscure if they always used to take place or if it was something temporary. Nor could we find traces of the myth of Reor in all, although it was found in some. What, then, was the common thing for this whole circle, except that they also and especially seemed strange?
Another, also a woman, had a couple more names to give us. We therefore consider it appropriate to press her particularly persistently regarding the organization. Her answer was as confusing as the others'.
- Organisation? she said. We are not looking for an organization. What is organic does not need to be organized. You build from the outside, we are built from the inside. You build with yourselves like stones and falling apart from the outside in. We are built from within like trees, and bridges grow between us that are not of dead matter and dead force. From us it goes out alive. The lifeless enters you.
It all seemed to me like a pointless play with words, and yet it made an impression on me. Maybe it was the very intensity of her deep voice that made me tremble. It is not impossible that it reminded me of Linda, who also has a deep and intense voice, especially sometimes, when she does not seem so tired, and that I must I can only imagine how it would have been if Linda, instead of the strange woman, had sat there and handed me her heart with such pleading and entreaty. gnawing tone. In any case, I committed to memory long afterwards, even the individual words I repeated to myself, which I therefore thought they sounded beautiful in all their meaninglessness. Much, much later, I began to glimpse a meaning in them. In any case, they gave me a shock even then,
When she was released, I said to Rissen:
- Something has occurred to me. Maybe we understood that about "a spirit" wrong. It can also mean an inner form, an attitude to life. Or do you think it is too subtle an explanation for it to belong in such a circle of fools?
When he looked at me, I got scared. That he understood me perfectly, I could see in him, but also something more. I understood that he also felt affected by the woman's warm and intense being. I understood that he was even more receptive than I was. And I understood that his very look, his very silence drew me in a direction, where all my love of duty, all my sense of honor forbade me to go. Somehow he was caught in those fools' yarns, and even I had for a moment felt the sweet and overpowering pull.
Hadn't the first youth today said of Rissen, that he could very well belong there - to the fools, to the secret sect? Hadn't I always sensed myself that Rissen was a threat and a danger? From now on I knew that deep down we were enemies.
We had only one of the detainees left, an elderly man with an intelligent appearance, and I was at once afraid of him - no one could tell, unless he also had the same suggestive power like the woman just now - and expected great things from him. He, if anyone, should know something about the innermost circles, and if luck was good, we could find there such compelling evidence that the whole sect of fools would be condemned and dispatched, to relief and salvation for myself and many others. But when he was already brought in and we had barely managed to put him in the chair, the local telephone rang and both Rissen and I were called to Muili, the first laboratory director. Eighth chapter
Muili's reception was not within our laboratory building, but you didn't have to go up to the surface of the earth to get there: through a passage three stairs down you came directly over to that building, where the laboratory offices were working, and after you showed your identity card and a secretary made sure by phone that you were expected, you were taken on. Within twenty-five minutes we stood before Muili, an iron gray and very thin man of sickly appearance. He hardly looked at us. His voice was low, as if he could hardly speak, and yet there wasn't a note that wasn't all order. That man was not used to listening to anyone else, unless it concerned answers to direct questions.
- Fellow soldiers Edo Rissen and Leo Kall, he said, you are called to another place. You put down the work you are doing. Within an hour, a police guard will be waiting for you, who will take you to the place of departure. Everything is ready with your temporary leave from military and police service. Understood?
- Yes, my boss, answered Rissen and I at once. Silently, we returned to the laboratory to tidy up after ourselves, shower and put on the leisure uniform. We had a small box for the trip standing by and also a box with kallocain utensils, as Karrek had ordered. At the appointed time we were also picked up by two silent policemen and taken by metro to our destination.
My admiration for Karrek rose even further. Truly quickly marched! Barely more than a day had passed since he left, and already he had worked out what he wanted. The man was a power, and not just in Chemical City No. 4, it seemed.
When we got out of the subway, it turned out that our destination was a hangar. A thrill of jubilant adventure ran through all my limbs. How far were we really going? To the capital? I, who had never been outside Chemical City No. 4, was gripped by the wildest excitement.
Together with a crowd of other passengers, we stepped into the well-lit plane, the policemen locked and sealed the door, and from the hum of the engine we understood that we were rising above the earth. I took out the latest issue of Kemisk Tidskrift from my box, Rissen as well, but I noticed that he, like me, often sat back and let his thoughts fly around other than the essays and messages in the booklet. I myself tried to at least suppress my curiosity, as soon as it reared its head. On film, of course, I had seen yellow fields, green meadows, forests, grazing sheep and cows, even aerial photographs, so I had basically nothing to be curious about, and still I had to fight with a ridiculous and childish wish, that the plane would have a single little peephole, which you could secretly look through - not because I meant to spy, but out of pure childish curiosity. But I knew, at least at the same time, that this was a dangerous tendency. Admittedly, I would never have gotten this far in science if a certain curiosity had not driven me into the mysteries of matter - on the other hand, it was a driving force for good and evil and could lure one into danger and crime. I wondered if Rissen had the same urges and desires to fight against - if he was fighting at all! He wasn't one to fight, he with his lack of discipline. I got the impression that he was sitting there, completely without struggle or shame, wishing that the plane had been made entirely of glass... A very apt impression. , I thought, that's how that man was.
I had dozed off when I felt a light bump on my elbow. There stood the conductor serving me dinner - that was also taken care of. I looked at my wristwatch: we had already flown for five hours and were apparently still a long way from our destination, because we couldn't wait for the food until we arrived. I calculated correctly: we had three hours left. If you not only knew the time, but also the speed of the plane, you could easily calculate the distance between Chemical City No. 4 and the place we were traveling to, whatever it was. Fortunately, the plane's speed was kept strictly secret, so that no spies could draw any geographical conclusions. The only thing you could guess was that the speed was very high and the distance therefore - very large. Of course, we could not conclude the direction either; that it was cool,
When we finally lowered ourselves and the engine stopped, the door was unlocked by a small squad of police, who then split up and took care of the various passengers. (Probably all of them were important errands, awaited and reported, maybe called like us.) Rissen and I were taken down to the police and military metro, where our carriage with incredible speed was hurled up to a station named the Police Palace. We knew we were in the capital. Through an underground gate we were led into an antechamber, where we were strip-searched and our luggage searched, and then up to a sort of small simple but fully serviceable cabins, where we were to sleep. The ninth chapter
Breakfast day the following morning we were shown into one of the dining rooms. We were apparently not the only night guests in the Police Palace - in the great hall, around seventy other fellow soldiers of both sexes and of all adult ages crowded around the serving tables. Someone waved to us from their seat. It was Karrek himself, who settled down with his cornmeal among the unknown. Much as he was above us in rank, we felt quite glad to see his familiar face, nor did he seem to mind our company. .
- I have requested an audience for all three of us with the police president, he said, and I have reason to believe that it will go quickly. You should collect the supplies as soon as possible.
Of course I rushed breakfast and rushed for the calocaine machines. It then turned out to be somewhat excessive haste. After all three of us were escorted down to the police president's waiting room, we had to wait a little over an hour before the door to the inner room was opened. There were also three people in front of us waiting, so I assumed it would take quite a while.
But we were the first to be represented. A small swift and nimble servant opened the door, walked up to Karrek and whispered to him. Karrek showed us both, and all three of us were led into a new waiting room, where we were again searched. All in all, security was much more thoroughly provided for here than at home in our chemical city, of course because the lives to be preserved here were so much More sophisticated and more precious than others in other parts of the World State. Already outside in the waiting room, so much more then this antechamber and inside the police president himself, guards were posted with raised pistols. So finally we stood before the mighty one.
A broad figure twisted around the chair and raised its bushy eyebrows in greeting. It was clear that the sight of Karrek made him quite pleased. I quite well recognized Minister of Police Tuareg from the Comrade Soldier's Portrait Album, his small black bear eyes, his strong-willed lower jaw, his full mouth, and yet he made a long more overwhelming impression on me than I ever expected. Perhaps it was also the feeling of standing before the concentrated Power that made me tremble. Tuareg was the brain behind the millions of eyes and ears, who saw and heard the most intimate actions and conversations of his fellow soldiers day and night, he was the will behind the millions of arms, which constantly or certain parts of the day protected the State's internal security - also behind my arms, to the extent that my evenings were devoted to police work. And yet I trembled, as if it had not been my own highest will that I had come face to face with - as if I had instead been one of the criminals he was chasing. And yet I hadn't done any harm! Whence then came the unfortunate division in my being? The answer was close at hand: it all depended on a suggested delusion, which could be expressed in the words: "No fellow soldier over forty can have a good conscience." And the one who uttered these words was Rissen. all depended on a suggested delusion, which could be expressed in the words: "No fellow soldier over forty can have a good conscience." And the one who uttered these words was Rissen. all depended on a suggested delusion, which could be expressed in the words: "No fellow soldier over forty can have a good conscience." And the one who uttered these words was Rissen.
- So, here we have our new allies, said the police minister to Karrek. Would you be prepared to do some small trial experiments in two hours? On the third floor is a room prepared for a laboratory - primitive perhaps, but I suppose there is what you need. If there is something missing, just tell the staff. And we provide test subjects.
We declared ourselves ready and happy. The audience was over, and we were led out another way and up to the temporary laboratory the Tuareg spoke of. The interior was fully adequate, as long as one did not intend to produce calcocaine in larger quantities.
Karrek had followed us upstairs. He sat down on a corner of the table in a position so far too relaxed that in anyone else it would have seemed limp and repulsive.
- Well, fellow soldiers, he said after we examined the work possibilities of the premises, what has come to light about that secret association at home in Kemistaden no. 4?
After all, Rissen was my boss and had the right and obligation to answer first. He did that too, but only after a long silence.
- For my part, he said, I can't think that anything directly criminal has come to light. They all seem slightly deranged, but criminals - no.
- So far at least, he continued after another pause, we haven't met anyone with an illegal act behind them, at least none that has occupied his thoughts enough for him to clear it during the callocaine rush. I will then disregard that man, who had failed to report his wife for treason, because you know, my boss, that we agreed to let something go right, as it concerned the recruitment of the Voluntary Offer Service. - As for those people, I would call them a sect of fools, but not a political association. Maybe you can't even call them a sect. They have no organization, no managers, as far as we can understand, no membership lists, not even a name, and therefore hardly fall under the law against associations outside the State's control.
- You are a great formalist, fellow soldier Rissen, said Karrek and sneered ironically. You talk about "standing within the regulations" and "falling under the law", as if printing ink were an insurmountable obstacle. You don't mean that, do you?
- Laws and regulations are for our protection..., Rissen objected bluntly.
- For whose protection, you say? attacked Karrek. Not for the State, anyway. The state has more use for clear heads, who can spit on the printing ink if necessary...
Rissen was reluctantly silent, but then repeated:
- In any case, they seem harmless to the State. We can safely release those who are already in custody and then leave the whole company to its fate. The police will still be busy dealing with murderers, thieves, liars...
My moment had come, I felt it. I must make my first serious attack on Rissen.
- My boss Karrek, I said slowly and with strong emphasis. Allow me to object, even though I am a subordinate. The mysterious association seems anything but innocent to me.
- I am interested in your opinion as well, said Karrek. So you consider it to be a normal association?
- I want to leave the paragraphs at their value for so long, I said. What I mean is that all those people individually and all together constitute a danger to the State. - First and foremost, I just want to ask: do you think that our World State would be in need of a completely new attitude, a completely changed way of life lling? Yes, don't get me wrong, I am aware that people both here and there would need to be awakened to a greater sense of responsibility and greater efforts - but a new attitude to life , unlike what we know before? Isn't that in itself an insult to the World State and the World State's fellow soldiers? And yet that was the meaning of what one of the detainees said: We want to evoke a new spirit. - First we took the expression more superstitiously concrete,
- You probably take it too seriously, said Karrek. My experience has taught me that the more abstract something is, the less dangerous its effects are. Common sayings can be used how to twist them, one moment at a time, the moment there in the exact opposite direction.
- But an attitude to life is not something abstract, I said energetically. On the contrary, I would like to say that it is the only thing that is certainly not abstract. And the way of life of those fools is repugnant to the state. Best and clearest you can see it from their own myths about a certain Reor, who seems to have been a bit sharper than the others in the matter of feeble-mindedness and therefore has become their special hero. Indifference towards offenders, worthlessness with one's own security (you are still yourself a valuable and expensive tool, that must not be forgotten! ), personal emotional bonds that are stronger than the bond to the State - that's where they want to take us! At first sight, their rites appear to be pure veneers. On closer reflection, they become overwhelmingly unpalatable. They are images of an exaggerated trust between people, or at least some people in between. I already consider that to be hostile to the state. The overly gullible sooner or later ends up like their hero Reor - he gets robbed sooner or later. And is it not on this basis that the State has grown up? If there was a basis and reason for trusting people in between, then no State would ever have arisen. The sacred and necessary basis for the State's existence is our mutual well-founded mistrust of each other. Whoever suspects this basis, he suspects the State. then no State would ever have arisen. The sacred and necessary basis for the State's existence is our mutual well-founded mistrust of each other. Whoever suspects this basis, he suspects the State. then no State would ever have arisen. The sacred and necessary basis for the State's existence is our mutual well-founded mistrust of each other. Whoever suspects this basis, he suspects the State.
- Pu, said Rissen with a certain fierceness, you forget that it has to rise again, as an economic and cultural center...
- I don't, I answered. And by all means don't believe that I am starting from some kind of civil superstition, that the State would exist for our sake instead of us being there for the State, as it is in reality. I just mean that the core of the individual cells' relationship to the state organism lies in the hunger for security. If one day we should notice - I'm not saying we have, but if - that our pea soup became thinner, our soap barely usable, our homes dilapidated, without anyone caring about the matter - would we complain then? No. We know that well-being is not a value in itself, that our sacrifices serve a higher purpose. And if we discover barbed wire fences across our roads, Do we not find ourselves in all restrictions on freedom of movement without complaint? Yes. We know that all this is happening for the sake of the State, to prevent criminals. And if one day we should find that all leisure activities must be curtailed for the necessary military training, that the countless luxury knowledge and luxury skills that used to be included tt in our upbringing must now be set aside for an indispensable focus on each one's special training as workers in the service of the absolutely necessary industry - do we have l to complain then? No, no, and no. We realize and like that the State is everything, the individual nothing. We realize and bow to the fact that most of the so-called "culture" - I exclude the technical skills - remains a luxury for times when no danger threatens (times which may never come again). What remains is the bare subsistence and the increasingly well-developed military and police forces. It is the core of state life. Everything else is extraneous.
Rissen is silent, dark and thoughtful. He had a hard time objecting to my not-too-original tones, but I was sure - and enjoyed - that his civil spirit was gnawing away. anger
Karrek had run up and started pacing back and forth. I had the impression that he did not listen too carefully to my arguments, and it pained me. When I finished, he said a little impatiently:
- Yes, yes, that is very good. The fact is, however, that so far as far as I know, we have never had a fight against "spirits". We have let them haunt the unreal spheres where they belong. When people talk next to their mouths at the dinner table or truant from an official party, it's at least something you can pick up on, but "spirits" - no thanks...
- We have never had the means to do that before, I objected. Kallocain gives us the possibility to control what moves in the minds.
Not even now did he seem to listen to my argument with more than half an ear.
- Anyone could be judged by that, he said in a slightly grumpy tone.
Suddenly he stopped motionless, struck, it seemed, by the implication of his own words.
- Anyone can be judged by that, he repeated, but this time infinitely slowly and gently. In any case, you may not be so wrong, after all - after all - - after all - - -
- But if you say so yourself, my boss, cried Rissen in horror, that anyone - - -
Karrek didn't hear him either. He had resumed his walk with long strides and with his peculiar Mongolian head with the narrowed eyes stretched forward.
I wanted to be of service to him, so I told, albeit with a certain sense of shame, about the reprimand I received from the Seventh Bureau of the Ministry of Propaganda. It finally captivated him.
- The Seventh Bureau of the Ministry of Propaganda, you say? he said thoughtfully. It's interesting. It is very interesting.
A long moment passed, while the faint creaking of his soles was the only sound to be heard, as near as the distant alternating subway noise and murmur of voices and other noise from the adjoining rooms. Finally, he leaned against the wall with his hand, closed his eyes and said slowly, as if weighing every word:
- Let me be perfectly honest. It would be within our power to push through such a crime of the mind law if we have enough cuts to the Seventh Bureau.
Right then, I don't think I had room in me for anything other than willingness to serve, but it is possible that I was also infected by a fan from Karrek's dreams of grandeur, from ¥n plans and visions that I myself did not know about. In any case, I caught my breath as he continued:
- I'm sending one of you, preferably one who speaks convincingly and well, to the Seventh Bureau. I myself can't go for some reasons... How is it, can you, fellow soldier Kall, put your words in? But I'd rather ask your boss. Can he do it?
Only after a moment of hesitation did Rissen answer almost reluctantly:
- He can, to the highest degree.
It was the first time I noticed an open approach to reluctance on Rissen's part.
- Then let me speak to you individually, fellow soldier Kall.
We retreated to my cabin. Extremely unabashed, Karrek put a pillow in the policeman's ear, and when I probably looked a little surprised, he said laughingly:
- In any case, I am the chief of police myself, and should the matter be discovered against the odds, I know where I have Tuareg...
I could not help admiring him in his very audacity, but it worried me somewhat that he so thoroughly climbed and hunted along personal lines, not along principles.
- Well, then, he said. You can find something to talk to Lavris about at the Seventh Bureau. I would suggest that you take that correction and tie it together with your invention in some way. And then, in passing - note well, in passing, since legislation per se is not part of the Seventh Bureau's tasks - do you mention the significance it would involve our new law, this one, yours and mine... I must explain it to you: Lavris has influence over Law Minister Tatjo...
- But wouldn't it be more practical to go directly to Law Minister Tatjo?
- On the contrary, incredibly impractical. Even if you had a definite business, a firm and real business, aside from this bill, it would be weeks before you were brought before him, and for so long we cannot spare you in Kemistaden no. 4. If, on the other hand, you only have the bill, it is highly unlikely that you were brought forward at all; who are you, one would ask, so that you can propose laws? The individual obeys the laws, but he does not make them. Lavris, on the other hand, takes care of the matter... But it is important to get her interested. Do you think you can do it?
- I can do no worse than fail, I said. There's no danger I'm exposing myself to.
Inside I was convinced that I would succeed; it was just such an assignment where I had to use my best skill. Karrek must have seen it in me too, when he tested me with his squinting gaze.
- Go then, he said. The license is this morning, and I will get you recommendations. Now you have permission to go back to your work. The tenth chapter
We had to wait for the Tuareg. When you are used to the fact that every minute of both night and day has its unshakable determination, such an empty space of time becomes incredibly painful, but everything, even the worst, has its end, and finally the Minister of Police appeared, so that we could have an opportunity to show what the calocaine was good for. I hardly thought that I would have to pull myself together so hard to keep my hand from trembling, when the sleeve was rolled up on an unshaven criminal type in the chair in front of me , but the Tuareg's small bear's eye stuck one in the neck so sharply, that one almost felt himself placed under the tip of the syringe. In any case, everything went as it should. Between a series of gross obscenities, which made the Minister of Police pull his full mouth and therefore lightened the mood somewhat, the subject made a full confession not only about the burglary he was accused of but so far could not be convinced of, but also about some other crimes, which he committed alone or together with others. He gave all the names and details without blinking an eye. The Tuareg's nostrils flared with pleasure.
We continued with others. Rissen and I took turns firing the syringe, the Minister of Police's own secretary sat at the protocol, and to further test us, they had inserted an innocent fellow soldier among the others - that is, innocent to the letter representation; in another sense, the word turned out to be more rarely in its place, to the police minister's clear delight. When we had six people in a remarkably short time, Tuareg stood up and explained that he was fully convinced. Kallocain would soon be allowed to replace all other examination methods throughout the World State, he explained. He intended us to keep a couple more days to train some experts for the capital; besides, he wanted to send in advance, that our task when we got back home would be to train injectors from all quarters and also, of course, large-scale calocaine manufacturers from the chemists. He left us with all the signs of a good mood, and shortly afterwards we had to receive twenty people, whom we were meant to educate. Subjects stood in a long line outside the door and waited, all criminals brought here directly from the remand prison.
The very day after that, I was called to Karrek and ordered to leave all the work to Rissen just in case. In my hand he placed a fairly substantial bundle of papers, which consisted of licenses, recommendations and identifications of various kinds.
I must have forgotten to tell you that the request for new propaganda for the Voluntary Offer Service, which I put together and presented to the various institutions in Kemistaden, had been fully subscribed in a couple of days and that I took all these signatures with me to present them personally at the Ministry of Propaganda. To be on the safe side, I asked Karrek for advice on where to turn, and he gave me many good directions. My excellent recommendations would certainly also be sufficient for the Third Bureau, which such propaganda sorted under. So I was soon in the metro and got off at the Ministry of Propaganda's state underground gate.
Already in the morning I had felt that nausea was coming on, and the Ministry of Police's staff doctor had put various medicines in me, so that I was in a somewhat abnormal state n.d. That's probably why I was so inexplicably upset when I requested my conversation with Seventh Bureau chief Lavris. In fact, it was Karrek's case that I went to a much higher degree than my own, since he had seemed so particularly interested in this new law coming into being, of course l that were hidden from me. But in my excited state I had a feeling that I was not acting on Karrek's behalf, nor even on my own behalf, but that my action was a link in the whole mighty State development, perhaps a of the last ranks before perfection was reached. I, an insignificant cell in the great State Organism, moreover itself properly poisoned, if only temporarily, by various powders and drops, was about to set in motion ¥ng a cleansing work, which would free the body of the State from all the sick poison that the thought breakers instilled. When I finally - after many formalities, body searches, waiting - got up to be let into Lavris's reception room, it was as if I was walking towards my own purification bath and would return and completely calm and free from all the anti-social gloom, which I did not want to know about and did not feel and which was not mine but which lurked so insidiously in my dark corners and which I could summarize under a name: Rissen. was in the process of starting a cleansing work, which would free the body of the State from all the sick poison that the thought-breakers instilled. When I finally - after many formalities, body searches, waiting - got up to be let into Lavris's reception room, it was as if I was walking towards my own purification bath and would return and completely calm and free from all the anti-social gloom, which I did not want to know about and did not feel and which was not mine but which lurked so insidiously in my dark corners and which I could summarize under a name: Rissen. was in the process of starting a cleansing work, which would free the body of the State from all the sick poison that the thought-breakers instilled. When I finally - after many formalities, body searches, waiting - got up to be let into Lavris's reception room, it was as if I was walking towards my own purification bath and would return and completely calm and free from all the anti-social gloom, which I did not want to know about and did not feel and which was not mine but which lurked so insidiously in my dark corners and which I could summarize under a name: Rissen.
Nothing inside Lavris distinguished the room from a thousand other workrooms, if not the guards with raised pistols, who posted here as at the Minister of Police and showed that whoever worked there belonged to the State's rare and precious tools. Still, I took a deep breath, and my temples throbbed. The tall, thin-necked woman behind the desk, with the skin tightened over her mouth and cheeks into a perpetually ironic smirk, was Kalipso Lavris.
Even if her age had not been undetermined and her demeanor rigid like that of an ancient deity, in my feverish mood I would probably have perceived her as only half-human. Not even a large pimple, which broke out on the left side of her nose and was apparently just about to reach its full maturity, could bring her down to earth in my eyes. Didn't she function as the highest ethical body of the World State, or at least as the leading force in the highest ethical body of the World State, which was the Seventh Bureau of the Ministry of Propaganda! In her face one could not read any personal affect as in Tuareg, her immobility contained no hidden leaps as in Karrek, she seemed to me to be the crystal-cut logic itself, indeed derived from all the contingencies of individuality. It was a feverish fantasy,
Already in advance I had known that the suggestion of a law change could not be made public, because the Seventh Bureau officially had nothing to do with it. The guards with their raised pistols reminded me even more clearly, without it bothering me. My case was a necessity so that the State would not, so that I would not perish.
I don't know how I got into the old corrections. While they took out my secret police card, I had to wait in a small extra waiting room, I think two hours away. You have to learn this, I thought, you have to learn to wait. And it worked. Still, it must be said that it was quickly expedited, when you consider what huge spaces such a card system over all the fellow soldiers of the World State must fill. Although I had never seen it, I could very well imagine that it must take at least an hour just to get through the huge halls to where the card was - whereas m Of course, everything had to be so carefully systematized, that you didn't have to look for long, when you got there - and then the same way back again. One also considered,
When I was let back in, Lavris sat and studied my card - "card" is, by the way, an improper term, rather it looked like a whole small bound book - and on the side about it a thin packet of paper, which probably contained preparation and concerns regarding my preparation. It was understandable enough, if she had forgotten the whole case, as busy as the Seventh Agency must be with the most remarkable indications and inquiries from all parts of the World State .
- Yes, Lavris said in his toneless and yet loud voice, here we have your case. On your police card it says that you have already requested to apologize on the radio, although you have not yet had the opportunity. What do you really want?
- I have taken hold of the words: the disclosure of the former - the divided ones - is a commendable act for the good of the State, I said. I have even made an invention, which makes it possible to reveal them more thoroughly and systematically than before.
And I told about the callocaine as captivatingly as I could.
- Now, I finished, you just have to wait for legislation of a more profound kind than world history has known before: legislation against thoughts and feelings hostile to the state. It may take some time - but it will surely come.
She didn't seem to react to my groping. I decided to try the same words that bit Karrek.
- Anyone can fall under that law, I said meaningfully, adding only after a very long pause: I mean of course - anyone who is not completely loyal to the core the rna.
Lavris sat quietly and thoughtfully. The skin over the cheekbones tightened perhaps a little more, and suddenly she stretched out a long, well-formed hand, carefully grasped a pencil between index finger and thumb, and slowly ¥ that the knuckles turned white. Without letting go, she looked up again and asked:
- Was this all your business, fellow soldier?
- That was my whole business, I answered. So only to direct the attention of the Seventh Agency to an invention, which may make it possible to demonstrate damnable internal division, although such a division yet has not become a crime before the law. If I have taken up the Bureau's time unnecessarily, I am willing to apologize.
- The Seventh Agency thanks you for your good will, she replied with icy impenetrability.
I saluted and left, full of doubt and still burning with fever.
As I staggered into the Third Bureau with my lists of names, the end of the workday was ticking and I was about to be knocked over by exasperation. An older grumpy man was left to finish some calculations, and I saw no other choice but to turn to him. He wrinkled his nose, kept his sour temper in check before the recommendations, reviewed the lists and said:
- One thousand two hundred names, you say? All scientifically meritorious? Too bad they come too late. Your request happens to have been fulfilled before you have even had time to make it. The same request has come to us from no less than seven other chemical companies, some as early as eight months ago. A propaganda of the kind you want is already in full swing being prepared.
- Nothing could please me more, I said, a little disappointed that I myself could not take part in the meritorious action.
- So you have nothing to gain here, said the man and bent down over his columns of numbers.
- But wouldn't it be possible for me to be in a corner? I cried, seized with an overconfidence which the fever must have induced. Since I am demonstrably so interested in the matter, why should I not be allowed to participate in the preparations? I have tons of recommendations - see here - and here - and here - - -
He glanced sometimes at my distinguished papers, sometimes at his unwritten column; finally he stared with a sigh at the last of the officemates, who disappeared out the door. He did not dare reject me. Finally he resorted to the way out, which seemed to him to be the least time-wasting.
- I will give you a certificate, he said, typed a few lines, quickly grabbed a large stamp, Third Bureau's, printed it under the writing and handed me the paper.
- The film studio palace at twenty o'clock tonight, he said. I don't know what they have in mind, but there is always something. That's enough. No one knows who I am, but they recognize the stamp. - So, are you satisfied now? - Just hope I haven't done anything crazy - - - Chapter Eleven
I am almost certain that it was something crazy he had done. Only a couple of days later I realized that I should never have been allowed to enter the Film Studio Palace. It was clear that a different preparation, perhaps a completely different education, would be needed in order for me to avoid the shock I now received, and consequently I was also sure of that the right authority would resolutely refuse me entry. Admittedly, the impressions were also somewhat skewed by my feverish condition; but such distortions usually pass quickly enough, and the shaking I experienced from the evening at the Filmstudiopalatset left traces for weeks.
My determined higher existence in the world of principles was of short duration. Lavris' impenetrable coldness shook my confidence, perhaps first and foremost my faith in myself. Who was I to come up with plans to save the State? A sick and tired person, far too sick and tired to take refuge in impeccably functioning ethical principles with a loud and toneless voice. Lavris would have had a deep, motherly voice like that woman from the fool sect, she would have comforted like Linda, she would have been a completely ordinary and friendly woman... When I came so ¥ngt, I was jolted out of my tired half-doze and rushed out of the metro at the right station. The late official's certificate with the stamp of the Third Bureau served as a license, and without really knowing how I stood inside the underground gate, which led to the Film Studio Palace. In the capital, all buildings of importance had their underground gate, and so it happened that I never once happened to come up into the open air during my entire trip to the capital.
When I followed my whim and asked to join a corner, it was under the pretense that I was going to see a film shoot. It would have been very interesting and, in my opinion, also quite strenuous to sit more or less comfortably as a witness to how a film scene was created. But I had miscalculated. The room I was admitted into was an ordinary lecture hall, no spotlights, no backdrops, no costumes to be seen, a hundred or so listeners in ordinary leisure uniforms filled the benches, that was all. They questioned me carefully about who I was, examined all my papers and finally placed me on one of the back benches.
The welcoming speech was given. I could conclude that what was involved here was a very rough review of an influential collection of film scripts, drawing up the most important guidelines for a desirable work and making a first rough thinning . A number of institutions were mentioned as represented, including several of the Ministry of Propaganda's bureaus, the Artists' Guidance Committee and the Ministry of Health. The voluntary quotation service itself, on the other hand, was not represented, which no one could understand better than me. Above all, the evening's speaker was welcomed, a psychological specialist in the subject, it seemed. I devoured him curiously with my eyes, when he stepped up into the lectern. Psychologists were hardly known in Kemistaden, if one disregards a few counselors at the children's and youth camps and from the psychotechnicians who carried out the necessary tests when the youth were sorted into the various professions . Djin Kakumita was small and slender in stature, with glossy black hair and lively and very well-balanced hand movements. As I try to reproduce his introduction word for word, I know very well that it is impossible and that long passages have been lost to memory . Still, I imagine the picture is still clear enough for me to give an idea of ​​the main content. As I try to reproduce his introduction word for word, I know very well that it is impossible and that long passages have been lost to memory . Still, I imagine the picture is still clear enough for me to give an idea of ​​the main content. As I try to reproduce his introduction word for word, I know very well that it is impossible and that long passages have been lost to memory . Still, I imagine the picture is still clear enough for me to give an idea of ​​the main content.
- Fellow soldiers, he began. In front of me I have a thick fuse, which traces its origin to no less than three hundred and seventy-two filmmakers. It is unthinkable that one could take up every one of the three hundred and seventy-two manuscripts in a discussion introduction, possible authors are excused. (Laughter among the audience: of course, none of these minions of authors, who, so to speak, left the raw material, were invited to the further qualified work.) Instead, I get as soon as possible draw up a general criticism, which at the same time is a guideline for the work.
- First and foremost, I have allowed myself to divide these stories into two large main groups: those with "happy" endings and those with "unfortunate" endings. Since the meaning is to attract and drive, one would think that the kind with a happy ending would be the most appropriate. However, this is not the case - as I will now show. For whom is a happy ending a good lure? For those who react laxly, for those who, after all, still fear pain and death - and those are not the ones we turn to to. Psychological investigations have shown that the Voluntary Offer Service is still to a vanishingly small extent recruited from that area. Once such people have reached the happy resolution, they happily forget the meaning of the film itself. They go home and sleep sweetly on their ear as usual in the assurance that now both the hero and the heroine are fine. They don't go to the propaganda office to register. Sacrificial videos with happy endings are for the time between promotions, not for the promotion periods themselves. They are there to reassure and encourage relatives and other fellow soldiers, if they ever happen to send a thought to children, siblings, comrades, who disappeared in Volunteers the quote service. Such films only need to occur sporadically, and if their effect is to be really good, they should not only end happily, but have strong elements of sunny mood, crazy antics - preferably also touching points, but not heroic. A series of scripts puts itself between two chairs in that regard:
- The films that have proven to be the most driving have always been the ones with so-called unhappy endings. I say so-called, because it always remains arbitrary, what one wants to regard as the highest happiness for the individual - arbitrary and also indifferent, because nothing strictly speaking should be regarded from n the individual's point of view. In any case, I mean films where the hero perishes. Under all circumstances, we can count on a certain percentage of fellow soldiers, for whom this basically seems to be the highest happiness, and especially if it happens for the State. It is from this percentage that the Voluntary Offer Service is mainly recruited, and I have reason to believe - reasons that I will return to later - that it is particularly large in our few days.
- As a rule, however, the heroes in spe are quite fussy in their choice of downfall. It is about presenting someone who charms. First and foremost, one must carefully avoid all such diseases and methods of death that have something ridiculous about them. Condition, where the subject becomes a wreck, unable to preserve his dignity, unable to control himself, unable to help himself Rivers with the simplest biological needs, are reprehensible when it comes to films of this kind. For the films of the intervening period - yes of course! And then with a happy ending and an emphasis on the comic side. But the sufferings that attract heroes must be a) dignified in appearance, and further b) purposeful.
- The longing to feel exclusively as a tool for a higher end is a driving force to be reckoned with far beyond the limits of the heroic type I have so far dwelled on. No one can seriously believe that his life has a value in itself, as such. If one is to speak of the value of a life, it must apparently be a value for something that lies outside the individual. Which day, which hour of our life do we dare to perceive as a value in itself? No. And I want to claim that this insight into the worthlessness of individual life in itself has its counterpart in an increasingly strong awareness of the ever-overshadowing demands of the Higher Purpose, with other words in the dawn of state consciousness in the brains of fellow soldiers. The suffering that the film portrays, should therefore have a demonstrable supra-individual gain as fruit - it must not be a person who is saved through the hero's downfall, then he could just as easily have killed himself! - not even a small number, but thousands, millions, preferably all fellow soldiers of the World State.
- A subdivision of this single-mindedness is) the glorious in the doom that is presented. By this I do not mean that the hero should reap positive glory; it lowers the film's level and immediately seems weaker on the truly heroic natures. On the other hand, he should be saved from deep inner disgrace. Opposite the hero is the villain, asocial and with selfish motives, the man who falls for temptation and shrinks away from pain and death. Quite ugly or unsympathetically ambidextrous in appearance, slack and undisciplined, cowardly and loose, he should constantly go as a warning parallel through the action, though never more exaggerated than that he sticks like a thorn in sensitive consciences: you're still not like that, are you? The fear of being cowardly, dishonorable,
- Very few of the manuscripts I have in front of me meet all the strict requirements I set out. Our work in the sequel will be instructive enough: the material is divided into a number of studio departments, according to the guidelines I have outlined here it is sorted and criticized, and what can be used is kneaded together , is improved, re-polished, until there is a comparatively small number of proposals, but fully satisfactory. In a fortnight this work should be finished, and then we will reconvene and begin reviewing the results together. Now I would like to thank you for speaking and hope for a lively discussion.
He stepped down from the lectern. I felt uneasy, though I couldn't quite say why. I was sure that everyone around me felt it simply inspiring, that he spoke of his fellow soldiers as a skilled technician speaks of ingeniously working mechanisms, I was sure that they were carried away by his society and himself seemed to stand in his place above the machine and pull the levers. But whether it was due to the fever or not, I had an all too vivid memory of my first subject, No. 135, and of his one great moment, which I had envied him. I could despise No. 135 as much as I liked, I could treat him as badly as I wanted in thought or in reality, but as long as I envied him, I could never regard him as the engineer of his machine .
The discussion began. Someone pointed out the importance of making the heroes in the majority of films young, to get the youth involved. Not that it was so much more desirable with younger tenderers than with older ones. The statistics showed that, on average, a quotation service lasted so and so many years, regardless of the age when he started to be used, and you could therefore even say ¤ga, that it was a pure advantage, if the State first got a few years of work in other ways and then this statistical average in the tender service, instead of only these later years. But another reason weighed more heavily: the young were so much easier to influence. As a rule, marriage and a full-time working life had an unfavorable effect on the number of registrations. Admittedly, within all groups and ages there were lonely, who went about hungry for they didn't really know what, and when so-called happiness and so-called life had disappointed them, they were prepared to seek instead the opposite in order to perhaps have better luck there, and they certainly couldn't be forgotten. But adolescence - above all a well-managed adolescence - was still the age of loneliness and disappointment before others - or maybe just the age of cautious loneliness and disappointment? - and consequently the one you should focus on before others. But adolescence - above all a well-managed adolescence - was still the age of loneliness and disappointment before others - or maybe just the age of cautious loneliness and disappointment? - and consequently the one you should focus on before others. But adolescence - above all a well-managed adolescence - was still the age of loneliness and disappointment before others - or maybe just the age of cautious loneliness and disappointment? - and consequently the one you should focus on before others.
Someone else emphasized the last speaker's statement and added that youth had another advantage over adulthood: because such masses of reports flowed in from the ranks of youth. Branches after every properly managed propaganda campaign, they were also able to thin out. Namely, it was pointless to accept the complaints from those registered. Many were such gifts that the State had more use for their brains than for their tissues and other components. It also followed from this, however, that the minimum age could not be lowered too low. Fifteen - sixteen years ago, it was often difficult to judge their general and special usability.
A further speaker objected to this last and explained that one could already distinguish in the eight-year-old child whether it was a gift to be taken care of or not and that one therefore ¥ could very well lower the minimum age of entry to eight years and why not even shoot a couple of films specifically tailored to affect that age . - Again others objected to him, partly that they had many examples of endowments of great use, which did not appear until a much later time; partly that such an appeal to children's age would not be of sufficient importance to justify the costs of extra recordings. Something would certainly be saved in that the children, who might apply, would never need any education,
Another came to talk about how important it was not to release the films too often. After all, it is not considered that any pressure should be exercised to elicit these reports, and it was certainly not needed either. A certain surprise was sufficient to produce an effect almost as strong as violence and in the long run considerably less dangerous. Happy to force a quick decision: now or never - if it is not done within that time, it is too late! The anxiety, which likes to wake up at certain crisis points in life, is sharpened before the quick election and drives in the right direction, if the propaganda is done well.
Someone thanked for the last point of view and emphasized that this anxiety, which now and then thickened within each fellow soldier, could become an invaluable asset for the State, if experienced psychologists were given take care of it. When it was used, so to speak, as a sentence for a decision, it did not hurt at all if the decision was made a little bit politely. It increased the relief when it was well understood, and the ecstatic joy of the first applicants drove new ones to apply in far greater numbers than if the whole thing has been made a trifle. To make the report irrevocable was to miss the mark, even the now mandatory ten years the speaker felt was too much. Exactly the same effect with fewer concerns was achieved if the application was made valid for five years. Already after five years, the tender servant very rarely had youth, strength and opportunities left to move on to a new path. Thanks to a well-managed propaganda, all violence and therefore all resistance could be avoided.
Remember I was sick. In no other way can it be explained that I stood up and asked for the floor. No. 135, oddly enough, hadn't stopped haunting my hot head. When I had him in my hand, I had done everything to humble him, but now it seemed to me that I must speak on his behalf.
- I must direct a remark against your way of treating your fellow soldiers - as mechanisms, I said slowly and tentatively. It seems to me an expression of - lack of esteem - of respect - - -
The voice failed me, and I realized that I was too dizzy to be able to put the words properly.
- No way! cried one of the preceding speakers sharply and intolerably. What innuendo is this! No one can put a higher value on the heroic type than I do. If I didn't know how necessary it is for the State - I, who have spent many years of my life studying just that type and its prediction tights! Do you think maybe I did it because I considered it worthless? And then you come and talk about lack of respect!
- Yes yes, I cried confused, respect for the result - but - but - -
- But what? asked my opponent, when I fell silent. What is it that I don't respect?
- Nothing, I answered dully and sat down. You are right. I was wrong and apologize.
I had stopped myself at the right moment, I noted with sweat on my forehead. What was I going to say? "You lack respect for 135 yourselves?" Nice points of view. Secret individualistic currents under the surface. I was afraid for myself.
No, not for myself! It was not me, this that I loathed and fought against. It was not me. It was Rissen.
For a long time I heard nothing of what was going on around me, so shaken was I by the danger I had escaped. When I finally managed to concentrate, Djin Kakumita was standing in the lectern. He had already been holding on for a long time, from what I could tell.
- This so to speak passive heroic type, he said, is becoming more and more in demand within state life with each passing day. Not only in the Voluntary Offer Service it is necessary, but also as a private man in the ranks, as service members in a subordinate position, as a parent and guardian of children to the State , and on a thousand other items. The need becomes especially strong in wartime, when every other fellow soldier should belong to this group. On the other hand, it is clear to anyone that it is not desirable in a leading position, where a cold and matter-of-fact look, quick enterprise and consideration s strength is required. Now the problem can be stated as follows: how, if necessary, can one increase the occurrence of this noblest of all types, this desperate and lonely hero's soul, disappointed in life and turned against plagues and death? Yes - - -
I felt really bad and decided to leave the room. Since I was a stranger and therefore could not belong to any of the working groups, it didn't really matter. With slow silent steps to disturb as little as possible I crept towards the door, where I showed the guard my papers and in a whisper began to explain my behavior . While I was doing my best, I was interrupted by a tall dark-skinned man in police and military uniform with a rather high rank. Oddly enough, he came from outside and wanted to enter the hall at this late hour of the evening. He showed a piece of paper to the doorman, who not only let him in right away, but even followed him in, so that I escaped into the corridor without further ado. From here I heard a low and determined voice, but could not make out what it said, and,
At the same time, the doorman returned to his place, and I couldn't help but ask him what was on.
- Shh, he whispered and looked around. Since you still belonged there, fellow soldier, I'll talk about it. The production of propaganda films for the Voluntary Offer Service has been suspended. All forces are needed elsewhere. You understand what it means, and so do I, but none of us has the right to understand it out loud...
Expressing yourself like that was already understandable, but I didn't bother to argue, but hurried into the elevator, tired as I was. But he was right: I understood very well what the interruption meant. The world state was in the shadow of a new war. The twelfth chapter
My sense of adventure was satisfied. What I experienced in the capital was varied and instructive enough that I would never forget it: the trial of callocaine before the Tuareg, my visit to the Seventh Bureau, last but not least the psychological the film discussion, which I wasn't ready for. No, I really wasn't ready for it. Inside me it lay and gnawed like a secret evil. Still, I had nothing to object to a single statement - I had to leave the purely psychological claims to the experts to examine - and I was terribly ashamed time I thought about my unwarranted and stupid outburst. So when I had completely made up my mind, why would it continue to torment me? Never had I heard it stated so clearly, so matter-of-factly, how objectively the value of each fellow soldier's contribution can be considered - and yet it felt as if the trouble of being there had become so enormous and the meaning of it all so vanishingly small. I knew it was a false and unhealthy view of things, and I tried to convince myself with every possible argument. But for the desolate emptiness that widened within me, there was no other name than meaninglessness.
It would have been nice, I thought with horror, if some joking policeman, or maybe Rissen, had taken the syringe out of my hand and stuck it in my own arm instead. What the Seventh Agency would say about my state of mind was easy to imagine. If Rissen had only been right, he would probably gladly have undertaken to expose me, I thought, and find evidence for his old maxim: "No fellow soldier over forty have a good conscience." Wasn't that what he had wanted all along? Wasn't it he who actually led me there with his insidious hints? The man was a danger to me and to everyone. Worst of all, it was wondering how far he had taken Linda with him in the depravity, and if they were in league against me, both of them.
All this lay beneath the surface and germinated. On the surface, I had far too much to do to devote my time to brooding. The Tuareg had already ordered that the normal court process be replaced with a callocaine investigation, and people from all over the World State were already lining up to attend the new courses we commissioned arrange. We were transferred - until further notice, it was said - in the police service and got our premises in the police station. Karrek let all the detainees walk directly to our classrooms to be examined at once and serve as practice material; there was therefore always a senior military or police officer present as judge, and minutes were kept both by the police secretary and by such secretaries as the course appointed.
It soon became apparent that the work was getting too much for us. We had to admit more people to the courses than was really appropriate, and still there were many who had to wait. We also didn't have time with all the detainees who came, we had to chase from case to case, we even shortened the lunch break by half an hour.
The work of the courts had been secret in human memory; I therefore had nothing to compare it to. But it struck me that so many of the statements were false or in any case unnecessary. Virtually every single one of those examined staggered out crushed and broken - for no reason, one would almost think, after being barked at by a few hundred out-and-out objections of more or less strange fellow soldiers - and yet their revelations were often of such a ridiculously unimportant nature, from the court's point of view, that one began to wonder if the device was worth its price. There were also difficulties with the callocaine, which was still being produced in small quantities in the laboratory rooms.
Once we came to discuss the issue at the dinner table. (We, that is to say Rissen, me and all the course participants, had been given a few long tables in the large dining room, where the police station's support staff also sat.) As usual, we had had a furious in a hurry all morning, the air had been even more humid and hotter than usual, and to top it all off, a couple of the fans on our floor had gone on strike. Someone grumbled loudly about the many indications for small things or for nothing.
- The indications have increased continuously during the last twenty years, said Rissen. I got it from the chief of police himself.
- But that doesn't have to mean that crime has increased, I said. It could also be the loyalty that has increased, the sensitivity to where the rotten is...
- It means that the fear has increased, said Rissen with unexpected energy.
- The horror?
- Yes, the horror. We have moved towards increasingly strict surveillance - and it has not made us safer, as we hoped, but more anxious. With our fear also grows our impulse to strike around us. Isn't it so: when a wild animal feels threatened and sees no way out, it attacks. When the horror creeps up on us, there is nothing else to do but to cut first. It's hard, when we don't even know where to cut... But better safe than sorry, isn't that the old rule? If you cut hard enough and skillfully enough, you might be able to save yourself. There is an old joke about a fencer who was so skilled that he managed to stay dry in rainy weather: he swung his sword against the falling drops, so that no tree ¤ffed him.
- You speak as if everyone had something to hide, I said, but I heard myself how dull it sounded, how unconvinced. Although I did not want to believe him, against my will I saw a sight that frightened me. If he was still right, and if my case with Lavris bore fruit, if not only words and actions but also thoughts and feelings were to be investigated and judged - then, then.. Like crawling ants in an anthill, all fellow soldiers would move, but not like the ants to cooperate, but to prevent each other. I saw them swarming: co-workers who indicated co-workers, husbands who indicated wives and wives who indicated husbands, subordinates who indicated managers and managers who indicated subordinates... Rissen couldn't be right. I hated him because he had the power to force his thoughts on me. But I calmed down,
A couple of days later, orders came from Karrek, that the course should be divided. The continued legal investigations with associated teaching would be led by Rissen with the assistance of the most resourceful course participants. I, on the other hand, would go on to lead a special chemistry course so that you could then start calocaine production on a larger scale.
It was called for by need, I understood that. Besides, I should have been satisfied with getting back to chemistry. And yet the order made me angry and disappointed.
But with that it happened in the following way.
Among our subjects, we had always had the same elderly man from the fool sect, whom I already spoke about earlier and who came in even before our trip to the capital. By chance, his case had been postponed - he had fallen ill and had not recovered until now - and was on the agenda just before tomorrow, when I was due to start my new chemistry course. It surprised and almost scared me, that I was so disappointed that I was not allowed to participate in that hearing. I have to wonder if I expected something like that woman who made such a deep impression on me - if I was drawn to re-expose myself to r similar dangerous influences. But I didn't really need to resort to derogatory reasons right away. My interest was certainly first and foremost the whole mess, which Karrek had ordered us to unravel - I wanted to know what kind of core was hiding behind all the madness. The man's intelligent appearance indicated that he could be more deeply versed in the innermost secrets of the junta than anyone we had met before. I would have liked to be present at that unveiling, preferably as I suspected Rissen of shady sympathies. There is indeed also a negative interest, I said to myself, which has nothing to do with a positive one. Such is my interest in the cult of fools, just like my interest in Rissen. I would have liked to be present at that unveiling, preferably as I suspected Rissen of shady sympathies. There is indeed also a negative interest, I said to myself, which has nothing to do with a positive one. Such is my interest in the cult of fools, just like my interest in Rissen. I would have liked to be present at that unveiling, preferably as I suspected Rissen of shady sympathies. There is indeed also a negative interest, I said to myself, which has nothing to do with a positive one. Such is my interest in the cult of fools, just like my interest in Rissen.
Even if I had to obey orders, I wouldn't completely lose sight of the case, I promised myself.
- Is it permissible to ask if that sick man was examined today? I said that day at dinner.
- Yes, he was examined today, answered Rissen shortly.
- And what came up? Something criminal?
- He was sentenced to penal servitude.
- For what?
- They considered him hostile to the state.
It was impossible to get anything firm and tangible out of my supervisor. I saw no other way out than to ask to see the protocol.
- There I have no authority to allow or forbid, said Rissen. That's the chief of police's business.
Karrek made no difficulties when I asked him on the phone. So on the first evening off, I went up to the police station, where Rissen was waiting for me to unlock the locker and give me the paper. It was the protocol of the course (the police protocol was somewhere else, I don't know where) and quite detailed. I have to read it on the spot, and at first it bothered me that Rissen had work to do there that very evening. I understood that he wanted to give information and clarifications, and I didn't want them.
But once I started my reading, I changed. Since he was at least within reach, I might as well ask.
- I would like more information about this, I said. "The subject began to produce strange songs." What does it mean? Why were they strange?
Rissen shrugged.
- They were, he answered. They were like nothing I've heard. Obscure words, just similes and images, I think - and melodies, I don't see how any soldiers in the world could march after them... But they made such an impression on me, that rarely has anything gripped me like that.
The voice trembled so noticeably that his movement kept grabbing me as well. I should never have gone here. I should have been warned by that warm female voice, which spoke of the organic and then always loomed over me as the deepest of all rests. It suddenly came alive for me again, and it struck me as something almost unfair, insidious and demonic, that an internal contagion can thus reproduce not only in the first hand , but also in others - from the strange man, whom I have not heard sing, and to me, as an echo over Rissen's voice.
- Can you give me some idea about his songs? I asked unsteadily. Can you repeat them?
But he shook his head.
- It was too foreign. It just stunned me.
I read on and made an effort to escape this influence, which I hated.
- You must admit yourselves that this is criminal, I said. As far as I know, all geographical information and rumors are punishable. And this: a wasteland of ruins in an inaccessible place! An unknown and inaccessible desert city! As I see, he has not been able to state the situation exactly, but only to spread such hints!
- Who knows if it exists, that desert city! answered Rissen doubtfully. He himself claimed that it would only be known by a select few, that some of them lived among the ruins. What does it need to be but a saying!
- In that case, still a criminal saying, because it is after all a geographical rumor. Now if such a desert city existed, and if it, as he says, originated from the time before the Great Wars and before the World State, and if it was really destroyed with bombs and gas and germs - so how could anyone dare to go there, if they were a fool? If it was possible to live there, the State would have taken possession of it a long time ago.
- If you look a little further down in the protocol, replied Rissen, you will see that it is claimed to be full of dangers all the same; here and there the very stone and sand are said to be filled with poisonous fumes, in cracks and crevices bacteria have remained alive, in general every step is a danger. But as you also see, he tells you that there are healthy water veins in the ground, that there is undamaged soil to grow edible plants in, that few of the inhabitants know about the harmless habit the ones who hide and hide and live in friendship and help each other.
- I see, I see. A miserable and uncertain life, full of anxiety. But it is an instructive saying. That's how life has to be, a constant anxiety and danger, when you run away from the big context, the State.
He was silent. I continued reading and couldn't help but sigh and shake my head.
- A word! I said. A fairy tale about things that don't exist! The remains of a dead culture! In that gas-blasted desert cave, they would preserve the remains of a dead culture from the time before the great wars! There was no such culture.
Rissen turned violently on me.
- How can we be so sure of that? he asked.
I stared at him in surprise.
- But we have already learned that as children, I said. Something worthy of the name culture cannot be thought of during the civilist-individualist era. Individuals fought against individuals, social group against social group. Valuable forces, strong arms, excellent brains could be arbitrarily disconnected, tossed aside by an opponent, suspended from the working apparatus, twisted away unused and without meaning.. That's what I call a jungle, but not culture.
- Me too, agreed Rissen seriously. And yet, yet - - can one not imagine a source, an underground, dying, overlooked, that broke the day also in the jungle?
- Culture is state life, I answered briefly. But his words set my imagination in motion. There I sat leaning over the protocol and imagined that I was sitting there as a kind of controller and judgmental critic. In fact, my greedy imagination searched in the most distant, the most unknown for something that could deliver me from the present, or give me a key to unlock up it with. But I didn't understand that.
One place in the protocol really made me wince. The man had reproduced a tradition that tribes on the other side of the border had once belonged to certain border peoples in the World State. The area would have been split apart during the great wars, and so would the people.
I looked up.
- It's too difficult, this about the border people, I said with a voice that trembled with righteous indignation. It is both immoral and unscientific.
- Unscientific? he repeated almost absent-mindedly.
- Yes, unscientific! Don't you know, my boss, that our biologists now consider it fully proven that we in this World State and those creatures on the other side of the border simply descend from different species, different as night and day, indeed so different, that one may very well wonder if the "people" of the neighboring state should be called people at all.
- I'm not a biologist, he answered evasively. I haven't heard that there.
- Then I'm glad I had the opportunity to talk about it. That's exactly how it is. And I don't need to explain that it is an immoral tradition. You can imagine the consequences of a border war. It is certainly a question whether the whole sect of fools with its teachings, customs and lifestyle is not part of the neighboring state's attempt to undermine our security - a detail of many in the huge spy apparatus it seems to have.
Rissen was silent for a long time and finally said:
- It was mostly for the sake of that tradition that he was sentenced.
- It just surprises me that he wasn't sentenced to death.
- He was a skilled professional in a branch of paint manufacturing, where it turns out there is a shortage of people.
I did not answer. I felt that his sympathies were on the criminal's side. But I couldn't resist giving him a little wink:
- Well, my boss - aren't you glad now that we've finally gotten to the bottom of the matter and know where to place our lovable fool?
- I suppose it is the duty of a loyal fellow soldier to be happy, he said with an irony that perhaps I wasn't meant to notice. And then may I ask you a question in return, fellow soldier Kall: are you absolutely sure that you don't basically envy them their overgassed desert city?
- Which doesn't exist, yes, I replied laughing. Was Rissen really really smart? If it was a joke, it was a bad joke without a tip.
Still, his question tormented me for a long time, as so many of his words tormented me, as the seized tremor in his voice tormented me, as all of Rissen, the ridiculous, sneaky and civil man tormented me.
With all my might, I rejected the idea of ​​the desert city, perhaps not so much because it was impossible as because it was repulsive. At once repulsive and alluring. It challenged me to believe in a city, even if it lay in ruins, even if it gaped with dangers of gas and germs, even if the antisocial individuals, who there saw kt his wretched refuge, crept between the stones chased by anxiety and horror and every now and then fell victim to the lurking death - but still a city, where the power of the State did not reach husband, an area outside the community. The allure of thought - who could tell what it consisted of? Superstition is often alluring, I thought scornfully. It is a casket, where one keeps one's lurking temptations like jewels: a deep female voice; a tremor in a man's voice; a moment, which one has never experienced, of perfect devotion; a reprehensible dream of personal confidence without limit; a hope for quenched thirst and deep rest.
In any case, I could not defend myself against my curiosity. Rissen, I hardly dared to ask about the further fate of the sect of fools, from which I myself was excluded, I was afraid that he would elicit another and more positive interest from my questions ¥gor than I really had. The only thing I ventured into was short ironic remarks at the dinner table. He also gave short, sullen answers to them. For example, I said:
- That most dubious desert city - is it still on the moon? It hasn't had any earthly existence, has it?
And he answered:
- So far, at least, no one has been able to locate it.
When I hurriedly looked up, I met his eyes for a second. He immediately knocked them down again, but I had time to read a question in them, and I felt it drill: "Are you absolutely sure that you don't envy them their overgassed in ¶kenstad?" - An envy in that style, he wanted more than anything to get at me. Although he forced me to take the initiative, he was still the aggressor and tried to incite me into submission. I cursed my sick curiosity.
I managed to pick up one more assignment, this time not from Rissen, but from a female course participant, even without me asking. She said something about writing collections, which one of the detainees had talked about - thick collections of paper with characters that were supposed to represent tones but were nothing like our letter designations. The closest they must be resembled bird carcasses behind a crossbar, it seemed. No one could decipher them, not even the prowling inhabitants of the desert city, although they must have enormous collections from times long gone. I was pretty sure that if there was any music at all in those signs - it could just as easily be a hoax - then it must be primitive and barbaric music. yet I had an almost wild longing to hear them deciphered once - a foolish dream, which would probably never come to fruition, neither for me nor for anyone else. And even if it had - in a collection of marches there can't possibly be any meaning, how would there be any help or any solution to a problem?
Meanwhile, my home life was dull and empty. Linda and I had come so far apart from each other that it was no longer worthwhile to shout. Fortunately, we were both so busy that we rarely met. Thirteenth chapter
Some time later I was called to Karrek on my free evening.
I exhaled as I sat in the metro with my visitor's license in my pocket. Karrek was and remained one of the mainstays of my existence. With him there was none of the infectious disease that frightened and incited Rissen.
Karrek received me in the parents' room, while his wife sat reading by a small bedside lamp in the family room. (They didn't have any children.) Inside our house, too, the lighting was rather dim - it had now become more and more common, for reasons of economy - so that I could not exactly study the features of the chief of police, but in his relser I noticed something unusual, which worried me, without being able to make out what it was. He was still for barely a minute, then he sat down, then he got up again and measured the floor with steps that were far too long for the tight space. When he was stopped by the wall, it happened that he beat his knuckles unbearably against it as if to push aside the obstacle.
When he began to speak, I noticed the same unusual liveliness in his voice; it was excited, almost elated, and he hardly bothered to hide his mood.
- Well, what do you say now? he began. We have succeeded, you and me. Lavris must have persuaded Tatjo to pass that law against anti-state attitudes. From tomorrow it will apply. Then - well, then it begins.
For a moment I felt paralyzed that it had really happened and that the fateful day was so close. Apparently it only made him happy. My lips, on the other hand, trembled, so that I had all the strength to control myself, when I answered:
- This must have been well thought out, my boss. Sometimes I wish we hadn't done it. Don't get me wrong, it's for practical reasons. At least it seems to me that there was already enough filth to root in, more than the State can handle even. We are already working overtime. Well, that can be remedied as soon as we have trained helpers. But what will become of all the new indications? We can't have two-thirds of the population in penal servitude!
- Why not! he said cheerfully, bracing his knuckles on the wall. The difference is not that great, and the salary budget will be smaller. But seriously speaking, there have been complaints from the finance manager in the city, and it seems to be the same everywhere. This means that for financial reasons we are allowed to clear the entries. No one will be detained again without the informant providing a detailed written account of the reasons for his suspicions. It's already chilling. Furthermore, we will only focus on more prominent fellow soldiers. We have to throw all our attention on the State's security, you understand. Subordinate items may be fine-tuned sometime in the future, and the turn to robbery, theft and minor private murders comes last. We get to thin, thin, thin, but it doesn't matter, we'll probably get work for it.
He resumed his walk and burst into laughter, the short, shrill grunt that was so characteristic of Karrek.
- No one gets away easily, he said.
Just then he stood so that the light above the lamp glittered in his eyes. Backlit, a face often looks terrifying, and I was in a tense period of my life. In fact, I froze when I saw the glint in his jaguar eyes - they were so eerily close and at the same time so eerily far away, completely out of reach ¥ll, resting in its own cold. Mostly to calm myself, I objected quietly:
- You don't mean, do you, too, that everyone goes around with a bad conscience?
- Bad conscience? he repeated, chuckling again. What does it mean, if they have a good or bad conscience. They must be calm and coherent like piles of files - no one can easily escape!
- Get rid of indication, you mean?
- Indication and judgement, I mean. You understand - sit down, by all means sit down, fellow soldier - you understand (there he approached again and leaned over me, and I was only too glad to sink into a chair, so that my knees shook), namely, if you have the right advisers and the right judge. We get advisers from different quarters, specialists in different issues, you can't give stupid punishments, as you understand: it doesn't pay to an incorrigible send to education, and a little fool with slightly outdated habits of thought should not be deprived of the State as a workforce, in these days of declining nativity. But, as I said, there the field is free for those who know what they want. Everything can be arranged, if you have the right judge.
I have to admit that I didn't really understand what he meant. But I didn't want to tell him that either. So I nodded seriously and followed his walk across the floor with somewhat frightened eyes.
It felt disturbing that it had become quiet in the room. I imagined that the chief of police was waiting for me to say something. His words about different punishments brought back the memory of something I had really wanted to say to him.
- My boss, I said, there is one thing that has surprised me somewhat. Under the spray they had a man the other day, a conspirator, who belonged to a dangerous sect of fools. He spread not only geographical rumors of a most harmful nature, but also a hideous rumor that the creatures on the other side of the border would be of the same stock as some of our border people. Also sing antisocial songs. He received penal servitude. Now I wonder: must be, that this was true in his particular case - it is contrived, and I am certainly not criticizing it - but is it well thought out, purely in principle? As you can imagine, a prisoner during his penal servitude comes into contact with a lot of people, both prison guards and other prisoners. Of the prisoners, some may only be in prison for a short time, others longer, in any case, many are gradually being let out. Don't you have to think about the poisoning they are exposed to from a person of that kind? He might not say that much, that's true. But I have made a discovery. I beg you, my boss, don't laugh at me - but I have noticed that from some people there flows out such a strong feeling of their whole attitude to life, that they are dangerous even when they are silent. One look, one movement from such an individual is already poison and plague. Now I wonder: is it well thought out that such an individual is allowed to live? Even if he can be used for useful work, and even if our population is declining, he is not likely to harm the State with his very breath any more n he benefits it with all his work? Don't you have to think about the poisoning they are exposed to from a person of that kind? He might not say that much, that's true. But I have made a discovery. I beg you, my boss, don't laugh at me - but I have noticed that from some people there flows out such a strong feeling of their whole attitude to life, that they are dangerous even when they are silent. One look, one movement from such an individual is already poison and plague. Now I wonder: is it well thought out that such an individual is allowed to live? Even if he can be used for useful work, and even if our population is declining, he is not likely to harm the State with his very breath any more n he benefits it with all his work? Don't you have to think about the poisoning they are exposed to from a person of that kind? He might not say that much, that's true. But I have made a discovery. I beg you, my boss, don't laugh at me - but I have noticed that from some people there flows out such a strong feeling of their whole attitude to life, that they are dangerous even when they are silent. One look, one movement from such an individual is already poison and plague. Now I wonder: is it well thought out that such an individual is allowed to live? Even if he can be used for useful work, and even if our population is declining, he is not likely to harm the State with his very breath any more n he benefits it with all his work? it is true. But I have made a discovery. I beg you, my boss, don't laugh at me - but I have noticed that from some people there flows out such a strong feeling of their whole attitude to life, that they are dangerous even when they are silent. One look, one movement from such an individual is already poison and plague. Now I wonder: is it well thought out that such an individual is allowed to live? Even if he can be used for useful work, and even if our population is declining, he is not likely to harm the State with his very breath any more n he benefits it with all his work? it is true. But I have made a discovery. I beg you, my boss, don't laugh at me - but I have noticed that from some people there flows out such a strong feeling of their whole attitude to life, that they are dangerous even when they are silent. One look, one movement from such an individual is already poison and plague. Now I wonder: is it well thought out that such an individual is allowed to live? Even if he can be used for useful work, and even if our population is declining, he is not likely to harm the State with his very breath any more n he benefits it with all his work? One look, one movement from such an individual is already poison and plague. Now I wonder: is it well thought out that such an individual is allowed to live? Even if he can be used for useful work, and even if our population is declining, he is not likely to harm the State with his very breath any more n he benefits it with all his work? One look, one movement from such an individual is already poison and plague. Now I wonder: is it well thought out that such an individual is allowed to live? Even if he can be used for useful work, and even if our population is declining, he is not likely to harm the State with his very breath any more n he benefits it with all his work?
Karrek didn't laugh. He listened carefully and showed no surprise. When I finished, a glimmer of sly laughter spread over his face, he halted his walk and sank into the chair opposite mine. There he sat with a leap stored in his tense immobility.
- You don't need to do so many laps, dear fellow soldier, he said softly and slowly. No one is more willing than I to deplore the grim fact you are referring to: that a very large group of fellow soldiers have been given a completely unnecessary value simply because the nativity curve does not rise sufficiently . All the propaganda we receive on a daily basis is not enough to increase our performance in the real bed to the desired degree. But what are you or I going to do about it? Let it be general and principled. Behind the general and principled is always the individual case. So who is it that you want sentenced to death?
I would like to sink through the floor. His cynicism scared me. It was certainly not just Rissen I had spoken of, but really the general case. What did he really think of me?
- You did me a great service when you convinced Lavris, he continued. Service against return service, that's how you know who you can count as friends. You learn to have a certain kind of intelligence, in any case of a completely different kind than mine (he nagged again). Therefore, we can be useful to each other. You can calmly answer: who do you want sentenced to death?
But I couldn't answer. Until now, my wishes had only been wishes, unreal and floating freely in the air. I felt that I once again had to see them for myself in sober lighting, before I bought.
- No, no, I replied, my concerns are really of a principled nature. I have experience with such plague carriers.
I stopped myself. Had I said too much? He remained motionless for a few more seconds, and I squirmed under his green eyes. Then he stood up again and banged his knuckles on the wall.
- You don't want to. You are afraid of me. And I don't mind that. But I will still do what I can for you. When you submit your statement - or your statements, what do I know - well motivated, remember that, well motivated, that will henceforth be the first condition, and that is if I'm not the one doing the rough thinning - so put a sign in one corner, this sign (he drew on a piece of paper and handed it to me), then I'll do what I can. As I said, it's not that strange at all, if you have the right referee, and we can probably make sure of that. The right judge and the right advisers. I don't intend to let you go, and you can have a lot of use from me - even if you are afraid. Fourteenth chapter
My sleep had never been the best, but lately it had gotten really bad. My monthly ration of sleeping pills was always finished long before the middle of the month, and what Linda didn't need she ate to the last crumb. I didn't want to turn to a doctor. I suspected that I would then get the stamp "nervous constitution" on my secret card, and it wouldn't be fun, especially since I couldn't agree to it myself such a designation. No one could be more normal than me, my insomnia was only too natural and explainable, yes I would rather see it as unnatural and morbid, if I slept well under such conditions. ..
In any case, my nightmares showed clearly enough that I wasn't exactly looking forward to being examined with my own calocaine. It happened that I woke up in a cold sweat from horrible visions, where I stood as accused and waited for my dose and for the terrible shame that would follow. Rissen, Karrek, even the occasional course participant loomed like terrifying figures in my dreams, but above all Linda. She was always there as my informant, as my judge, as the one who bent over me with the callocaine syringe. At first it was with relief that I woke up and saw the real Linda of flesh and blood next to me in bed, but soon it was as if the visions of the night began to invade her wake up reality so that each time the relief became less and the sensitive and awake Linda sought to absorb more and more of the horror's malice. Once I was close to telling everything about my nocturnal torment - but stopped myself at the last minute by the memory of her cold gaze in the dream. Afterwards I was glad I hadn't said anything. The suspicion that Linda was secretly on Rissen's side left me no peace anymore. If she knew what I thought of him, she could in the same moment be my enemy, and a merciless enemy, as strong as she was. Maybe she was already my enemy and just lurking at the right second to strike. No, it would have been my misfortune if I had said a word to her about this. Once I was close to telling everything about my nocturnal torment - but stopped myself at the last minute by the memory of her cold gaze in the dream. Afterwards I was glad I hadn't said anything. The suspicion that Linda was secretly on Rissen's side left me no peace anymore. If she knew what I thought of him, she could in the same moment be my enemy, and a merciless enemy, as strong as she was. Maybe she was already my enemy and just lurking at the right second to strike. No, it would have been my misfortune if I had said a word to her about this. Once I was close to telling everything about my nocturnal torment - but stopped myself at the last minute by the memory of her cold gaze in the dream. Afterwards I was glad I hadn't said anything. The suspicion that Linda was secretly on Rissen's side left me no peace anymore. If she knew what I thought of him, she could in the same moment be my enemy, and a merciless enemy, as strong as she was. Maybe she was already my enemy and just lurking at the right second to strike. No, it would have been my misfortune if I had said a word to her about this. Maybe she was already my enemy and just lurking at the right second to strike. No, it would have been my misfortune if I had said a word to her about this. Maybe she was already my enemy and just lurking at the right second to strike. No, it would have been my misfortune if I had said a word to her about this.
Even less would I like to tell another dream, which can't really be counted among the usual nightmares. It was a dream about Ã–kenstaden.
I stood at the beginning of a street and knew I had to walk it - why I didn't know, but I was anxious. certain that my hey and woe depended on whether I arrived. The houses on both sides of the street were piles of ruins, some high as small mountains, others sunk into the ground and half covered with sand and scrap. In a few places creepers had taken root and were struggling up the remains of the walls, but between them lay long stretches bare and lifeless in a burning midday sun. And I thought I could make out, that here and there on the lifeless stretches the stone exhaled a faint yellowish smoke. In other places, the light broke across the sand in a leafy valley ring, which scared me just as much. I took a step to feel my way through the poisonous fumes, but at the same time a gust of wind came and drove a small loose cloud of the yellow smoke before it - it spread in thin eddies, and I had to back away so as not to come into contact with the. Farther away on the street I also saw that the leafy valley ring at one point began to rise like a faint flame and almost block the entire street. I looked around, worried that a similar explosion behind me would cut off the road, so I neither came forward nor back, but at least there were still no signs of anything something like that. Again I took a step forward. Nothing happened. Another one. But then I heard a small sharp bang behind me, and when I turned my head, I saw that the stone I had just stepped on was in the process of transformation. It loosened from within, squeaked, and crumbled to dust in an instant, while I thought I perceived a faint unpleasant smell. I was in no mood to move on, stand still or turn around.
Then I heard strange sounds of voices a little way from there. There gaped a half-clogged cellar door with green creepers on both sides. I had not noticed it before, but in my anxiety I breathed out, when I saw the green living its life so close to me. Up the cracked and sunken stone steps, someone stepped into the light and beckoned me to come. I no longer remember how I ended up in the cellar gate, maybe I took a wild leap over the dangerous rocks. In any case, I entered a dilapidated stone chamber without a roof, where the sun fell in and grass and flowers waved over my head. Never had a room with an intact ceiling and walls struck me as such a safe haven. From the grass huts spread a scent of sun and earth and warm carefreeness, and the voices sang again, though now at a long distance. The woman who had beckoned to me was there, and we embraced. I was saved and would like to fall asleep from tiredness and relief. For me to walk down the street had suddenly become completely unnecessary. She said, "Are you staying with me?" - "Yes, let me stay!" I answered, feeling free from all worries like a child. When I bent down to see what kind of water I felt with my foot, I noticed that across the entire earthen floor ran a clear spring there, and it filled me with indescribable gratitude. "Don't you know that life flows here," said the woman. At the same time I knew it was a dream, from which I would wake, and searched in my mind for some means to keep it - so eagerly, that the heart began to thump and thump. ¤cked me. and we embraced each other. I was saved and would like to fall asleep from tiredness and relief. For me to walk down the street had suddenly become completely unnecessary. She said, "Are you staying with me?" - "Yes, let me stay!" I answered, feeling free from all worries like a child. When I bent down to see what kind of water I felt with my foot, I noticed that across the entire earthen floor ran a clear spring there, and it filled me with indescribable gratitude. "Don't you know that life flows here," said the woman. At the same time I knew it was a dream, from which I would wake, and searched in my mind for some means to keep it - so eagerly, that the heart began to thump and thump. ¤cked me. and we embraced each other. I was saved and would like to fall asleep from tiredness and relief. For me to walk down the street had suddenly become completely unnecessary. She said, "Are you staying with me?" - "Yes, let me stay!" I answered, feeling free from all worries like a child. When I bent down to see what kind of water I felt with my foot, I noticed that across the entire earthen floor ran a clear spring there, and it filled me with indescribable gratitude. "Don't you know that life flows here," said the woman. At the same time I knew it was a dream, from which I would wake, and searched in my mind for some means to keep it - so eagerly, that the heart began to thump and thump. ¤cked me. For me to walk down the street had suddenly become completely unnecessary. She said, "Are you staying with me?" - "Yes, let me stay!" I answered, feeling free from all worries like a child. When I bent down to see what kind of water I felt with my foot, I noticed that across the entire earthen floor ran a clear spring there, and it filled me with indescribable gratitude. "Don't you know that life flows here," said the woman. At the same time I knew it was a dream, from which I would wake, and searched in my mind for some means to keep it - so eagerly, that the heart began to thump and thump. ¤cked me. For me to walk down the street had suddenly become completely unnecessary. She said, "Are you staying with me?" - "Yes, let me stay!" I answered, feeling free from all worries like a child. When I bent down to see what kind of water I felt with my foot, I noticed that across the entire earthen floor ran a clear spring there, and it filled me with indescribable gratitude. "Don't you know that life flows here," said the woman. At the same time I knew it was a dream, from which I would wake, and searched in my mind for some means to keep it - so eagerly, that the heart began to thump and thump. ¤cked me. I answered, feeling free from all worries like a child. When I bent down to see what kind of water I felt with my foot, I noticed that across the entire earthen floor ran a clear spring there, and it filled me with indescribable gratitude. "Don't you know that life flows here," said the woman. At the same time I knew it was a dream, from which I would wake, and searched in my mind for some means to keep it - so eagerly, that the heart began to thump and thump. ¤cked me. I answered, feeling free from all worries like a child. When I bent down to see what kind of water I felt with my foot, I noticed that across the entire earthen floor ran a clear spring there, and it filled me with indescribable gratitude. "Don't you know that life flows here," said the woman. At the same time I knew it was a dream, from which I would wake, and searched in my mind for some means to keep it - so eagerly, that the heart began to thump and thump. ¤cked me.
That dream, as beautiful as it was, could perhaps be called even more disturbing than the nightmares, and I didn't want to tell it, neither to Linda nor to anyone Other. Not that Linda would have been jealous of the woman in my dream - she bore certain features of the detainee with a deep voice, which I have already spoken about several times, but she had Linda's Eyes - but because it was such a clear answer to Rissen's question: "Are you sure you don't envy them their gassed desert city?" Rissen's suggestion had penetrated so deeply that even my dream life was under his influence. How it helped that I defended myself with the fact that this was not me, but Rissen! No judge in the world would care about such a defense.
This happened before I was summoned to Karrek, that is, before the new law was passed and before I had other means of defense than an indefinite hope of revenge once in a while the future.
When I came from Karrek and knew that I would be able to put my thoughts of revenge into action already tomorrow, I was in a terribly upset mood. The goal, which had previously been so distant, was suddenly within reach, but all the details, when it came to getting there, seemed even insurmountable. If Linda really loved Rissen, wouldn't she somehow find out that I was the one who introduced him? How she would behave, I didn't know, but I was quite sure that she would succeed. She would succeed, and she would have her revenge. I trembled for her revenge. Whatever happened, I didn't want to end up under my own calocaine injection.
That night I hardly slept at all.
The following morning, the newspaper contained an article with the headline: THOUGHTS CAN BE JUDGED.
It was an account of the new law, also with reference to my callocaine, that made it possible. Besides, nothing could sound more reasonable than the new penal provisions: henceforth, one would not be able to go by woodenly established paragraphs, which meted out the same punishment to the hardened who ate it once before, if they were caught in the same act. The fellow soldier himself would be the focus of the trial, not his loose act. His very disposition was to be examined and recorded, not for the sake of the old senseless question "adequate or not," but to separate usable material from useless. The punishment would no longer consist of certain mechanically distributed years of penal servitude, but carefully thought out according to the calculations of the most prominent psychologists and economists about what paid off and what did not. A physical and mental wreckage, which could never be thought of as being of real use to the State, should not expect to be allowed to live just because it failed to do any harm. On the other hand, one had to take into account the scarcity of population and, in the worst case, make use of even less desirable material, if it could be used for labor after all. The new law against anti-state mentality came into force already today, but at the same time it was pointed out that all statements must be fully justified and also signed with a verifiable name, i.e. not anonymous as before, this is to prevent an inundation of less necessary information and thus an excessively large government expenditure for calcocain and court officials. In any case, the police reserved the right to take or not to take into account the information as it saw fit.
Karrek had not told me that one would put one's name out there. It would make it even easier for Linda, if she wanted to snoop on Rissen's informant.
The day passed without sensations at work, but I can't say: in peace and quiet. I didn't exchange a word with Rissen during dinner. I hardly dared to look at him. I had a terrible idea that he knew my thoughts and my intentions and at any moment could make a move and happen to me. At the same time, I knew that I didn't dare to do anything, because I wasn't sure about Linda. Every hour's delay was dangerous, but I must postpone.
When I then sat there at home at my dinner, it was like repeating the terrible dinner. The same difficulty meeting Linda's eyes as before Rissen's, the same feeling that she must know everything, the same hostility that charged the air between us. The seconds crawled by, and I never thought the housekeeper would leave and the children would fall asleep. Finally I was alone with Linda, and to avoid listeners I turned the radio on full blast and placed both her and me so that the speaker came between us and the police ¶rat
I no longer remember what kind of lecture it was that spewed upon us, I was too busy with my inner anxiety to notice it. Linda didn't show with a face what she thought either of the lecture or of my eagerness to get her placed in that particular chair - probably she understood what was going on and listened as little as I did . Only when I moved my chair right next to hers did she look at me questioningly.
- Linda! I said. There is something I must ask you.
- Yes, she just said without showing any surprise. I had always known her mastery was perfect. And I had always known that if the two of us once came to the extreme and last, to a fight to the death, she would be the most terrible opponent. Was that really why I couldn't let her go? Was I afraid of what could happen next? In my own love there was the great horror, I knew it enough and had known it for a long time. But there was also a dream of security without borders, a dream that my stubborn love would one day force her to become my best friend. How it would happen, and how I would be told that it happened, I had no idea - it was a dream as indefinite and as separate from reality as the dream of a future life. But what was certain was that in the next moment I could have squandered this dreamed security. From uncertain alliances we could have passed in a minute to bitter enemies, without even my ever knowing it, without a smile on her face or a tremor in her voice betrayed her. Still, I must go on.
- It is of course for purely formal reasons that I am asking this, I continued, trying to be polite. I am sure of the answer myself, have never for a moment believed anything like that, and even if it were true, you will understand that I don't wouldn't give a damn about it. That's how well I hope you know me - and that's how well I know you.
I wiped my forehead with the handkerchief.
- Well? said Linda, looking at me searchingly. Her big eyes were like spotlights, so vulnerable I felt when she directed them at me.
- Well - it is nothing else but this, I said (and now I really snickered very cheerfully): have you had a love affair with Rissen?
- No.
- But you love him?
- No, Leo, I don't.
That's how far we could go and no further. Had she said yes, I would have believed her without further ado - I suppose. Now, when she said no, I didn't dare trust her for a moment. Then what was the point of asking? She had seen that I was lying, she understood that I cared a lot about her answer. Tomorrow or the day after she would understand why I asked her - maybe she already knew it by now, maybe Rissen had already given her a hint about the danger that threatened him. I unexpectedly peered into her face, so that I even forgot to breathe and suddenly had to sigh. My heart almost stopped when I thought I discerned a movement, weak, hardly noticeable, a kind of worry in the skin itself - but still a sign. I believed that sign more than all her words.
- You don't believe me? she asked seriously.
- Of course I believe you, I answered in an exuberant tone. If only she believed me too! If I could safely put her to sleep, then at least the evil would not have gotten worse. But I sensed that she was not fooled.
We couldn't go any further. Even this conversation had cost me so much self-defeat, that I was completely dull - and yet nothing was won. Never before had I felt the gaping gap so clear and so insurmountable. My control wasn't enough to fill the rest of the evening with jokes and casual talk, and even then it was only for an hour, as we were both on night duty. Linda was also silent, and there lay a silent worry between us, which sucked the marrow out of one's bones.
Finally, that hour also passed.
Late at night we both came home exhausted. Linda fell asleep, I heard her steady breathing, but I lay awake. Now and then I could sink into a semi-sleep, but each time I sprung up again with a keen sense of danger. It could be imagination, the room was quiet and Linda slept as deeply as before. But I was close to despair. Had no one really thought until now of what a game of chance it was to sleep side by side with another, two people alone all through the long night, with no other witnesses than the police eye and the police ear on the wall - and even they weren't a guarantee: firstly, they certainly weren't always in use, and secondly, they could indeed control and retaliate, but not prevent what happened. Two people alone, night after night, year after year, and maybe they hate each other, and if the wife wakes up,
The thought hit me like a wave lifting a piece of bark. I had no choice anymore, I had to act as I did, in pure self-defense, to save life. Somehow it has to go. During some operation I was able to smuggle away the small amount of calocaine that was needed. Linda would be forced to give up her secrets at a price.
Then she would be in my power as I had never been in hers. Then she would never dare to hurt me. Then I could also go ahead and enter Rissen.
Then I would be free. Fifteenth chapter
I didn't sleep much that night, but when I showed up for my work, I had shaken off the anxiety and indecision that had weighed on me the previous days. I was on my way to shop; already it was liberation.
Nothing was easier than taking away enough calocaine for a syringe. Small quantities were always lost during the experiments, and the check-weighings happened comparatively rarely, especially now, when the haste had upset the good order. And above all: the one who weighed was Rissen. Unless he had the unfortunate whim to pounce on me today or tomorrow with a check-weighing, he would never again get the chance to execute someone. Whoever was his witness and helper would certainly not think of such a detail in the general frenzy. Only tomorrow was over, I would be sure. I have to trust my good luck and Rissen's haste.
So I came home that evening with a syringe in my pocket and a small bottle filled with innocent pale green liquid. And the liberation of having taken the first step into action gave me new strength, so that I even managed to talk and joke with the maid and the children during dinner. I just nodded to Linda, but without batting her eyes. They were spotlights, but not as penetrating as the one I had hidden in my pocket.
It was duty evening, and we got to bed late.
For a long time I lay still and waited for her to fall asleep. When I was finally sure, I crept up first by the glow of the small night lamp and hung out for the police eye. In front of the police station, I raked up a pillow as shamelessly as I once saw Karrek do it. Of course it was forbidden, but I was on the verge of despair, and whatever happened, I didn't want to let the police follow my business.
Linda put the dim lighting there as beautifully as I had rarely seen her. With her bare gold shimmering arm, she had pulled the blanket up to her chin, as if trying to cover herself, even though it was very warm in the room. She had turned her head to the other side, so that the regular profile stood out clearly against the shadows on the pillow; the skin shone like smooth living velvet against her heavy black eyebrows and eyelashes. The tense red bow had relaxed in sleep into a soft and very tired girl's mouth. So young, I had never seen her awake, not even when we first got to know each other, and never so touching. I, who used to be afraid of her being so strong, was almost seized with pity for her helpless childish weakness. That Linda, who now lay there in front of me, I would have liked to approach in a different way, tenderly and carefully as if it was the first time we met. But I knew that if I woke her up, the red bow would tighten and the eyes would turn into spotlights again. She would sit up straight and wide awake in bed and with furrowed brows discover the sheet and the pillow on the wall. And if I still wanted to approach, if I came with love to cover my mistrust, what would it serve? A momentary illusion of togetherness, a rush that was over tomorrow - and I wouldn't even know where I had her in the matter of Rissen. She would sit up straight and wide awake in bed and with furrowed brows discover the sheet and the pillow on the wall. And if I still wanted to approach, if I came with love to cover my mistrust, what would it serve? A momentary illusion of togetherness, a rush that was over tomorrow - and I wouldn't even know where I had her in the matter of Rissen. She would sit up straight and wide awake in bed and with furrowed brows discover the sheet and the pillow on the wall. And if I still wanted to approach, if I came with love to cover my mistrust, what would it serve? A momentary illusion of togetherness, a rush that was over tomorrow - and I wouldn't even know where I had her in the matter of Rissen.
I started by tying a handkerchief around her mouth, so she wouldn't scream during the fight itself. Of course she woke up and tried to break free, but except that I was much stronger than her, I had all the advantages on my side. It wasn't hard to hold her down, while I tied her hands and feet so she wouldn't be able to squirm away. I must have both hands free.
She flinched when I inserted the syringe, but then didn't move. She had well realized that it was useless to resist.
I calculated eight minutes as the safe time for the liquid to work. When they were gone, I untied the handkerchief. I saw in her whole face that the syringe had taken. She had regained almost the same girlish face she had in her sleep.
- I know what you are doing, she said thoughtfully, and even the voice had a shift of the same childishness as the face. You want to know something. What is it you want to know? It's too much you should know. I have too much to say. I don't know where to start. I want it myself, why should you force me. But maybe I would never have been able to otherwise. It has been like this for years. There is something I want to say or do, and I don't know what it is. Maybe it has been a lot of little things, kindness and coziness and caressing, and when they were impossible, the big and important things were also impossible. One thing I know, I know that: that I would like to kill you. If I only knew it was never discovered, I would kill you. What does it do to the rest if it gets discovered, I still do it. It's better than it being as it is. I hate you because you can't save me from this, I would kill you if I wasn't scared. Now I dare. Just not as long as I can talk to you. I've never been able to talk to you. You're scared, and I'm scared, and everyone's scared. Alone, completely alone, and not quite alone, like when you were young. It's terrible. I have not been able to talk to you about the children, not about how I have grieved that Ossu is gone, and how afraid I am of the day when Maryl is gone, and Laila. I thought you would despise me. You can despise me now, I don't care. I often wish I was a young girl again and unhappily in love instead of happy. Do you know that it is enviable to be a young girl and unhappily in love, even if you don't understand it then? When you are a young girl, you go and believe that there is something else, a freedom that should come with love, a kind of refuge that should be with the one you care about, a kind of warmth and a kind of rest - something that doesn't exist. Unlucky love - you leave and are pleasantly disappointed that I didn't get the big luck with you - and then you think that the others, they might have got it, and it exists, it is available - and you must understand that when there is so much joy in the world and all thirst has a purpose, so isn't it hopeless even to be unhappy. Not despairing. But happily dear, it slips into the void. There is no goal, there is only loneliness, and why would there be anything else, why would there be a meaning for us individually. I've liked you too much, Leo, and then you didn't exist either. I think I could probably kill you now.
- And Rissen? I asked hoarsely, afraid that the precious minutes would slip away without me knowing what I wanted. What do you think about Rissen?
- Rissen? she repeated in wonder. Yes, Rissen... There was something special about Rissen. What was that? He wasn't far away like everyone else. He didn't scare anyone, he wasn't afraid himself.
- You loved him? You still love him?
- Rissen? If I loved him? No no no. If I could! He was just different from others. Close. Quiet. Safe. Unlike you, and unlike me. Had one of us been like him - or both, both, Leo - - - But it would have been you. That's why I want to kill you, just to get away, because there will never be anyone else but you, and it won't be you either.
She began to worry and frowned. I wouldn't have dared to take more callocaine than for a syringe, it would have been too dangerous. And now I didn't know what to ask her.
- How can that be? she whispered anxiously. How can it be that you search for something that doesn't exist? How can it be that you are sick to death, when you are completely healthy, when everything is as it should be - - -
The voice dropped to a murmur, and from the greenish color of her cheeks I knew she was waking up. I supported her under the neck and brought the glass to her lips. She was still tied up - she probably hadn't even noticed it during the anesthesia. Now I released her, although I wondered with some trepidation what she would do when she was free. All the while I had been looking forward with a mixture of anxiety and triumph to the moment when she would be seized with remorse and shame at her involuntary openness. I could feel that my hand was shaking, so that it could not hold her head still. Then I laid her down on the pillow again and stared unaccustomedly and anxiously into the relaxed features.
But the reaction I expected seemed to be missing. When she opened her eyes, they were very thoughtful, but as calmly wide open as usual, and they met mine without turning away. Her mouth scared me. The red bow did not want to tense up as usual, it still lay resting and limp, so that the face retained its childlike expression from the sleep and intoxication. I did not know that there could be a solemnity, which frightened, in such a lack of control. Her lips moved faintly, as if she were repeating her words to herself. I had nothing to say to her, could not disturb her, just sat still and looked at her face.
Finally she fell asleep, even though I sat and watched over her. She was sleeping, and I undressed quietly and tried to sleep too, but couldn't. A dull shame and anxiety flooded me. You could have thought that I was the one investigated and exposed and not her, that's how I felt. The whole time I had it clear to me that whatever she came to say, she would be in my power afterwards in a different way than before. When she awoke, she would have revealed secrets that were not to be revealed and that I could threaten to reveal if she took a single hostile step towards me. Maybe she had, I didn't know. Her threat to kill me - I had heard that many times during my work and knew it was rarely carried out - but maybe it was dangerous for her, why not . It was possible that I had her in my hand, it was possible,
Except on one point: I could never use any advantage. Everything she had said was said by myself. I was sick, torn to the core, because she had held herself like a mirror in front of me. I had no idea that she, with her tight lips, with her silence and her piercing eyes, was of the same weak wood as me. How could I threaten her, how could I force her, when it was like that.
After a short sleep I woke up several hours early. Linda was sleeping. The night's experiences were clear to me the moment I woke up, but in addition there was a nagging anxiety about something left undone. Immediately I knew it: Rissen. Today.
Now I felt like postponing the whole thing again, but found no reason for my indolence. Wasn't that problem at least the same today as yesterday? The rice was the same. It wasn't, never had been because he was possibly my rival, that I felt I had to get rid of him. My disgust ran much deeper than that. It just felt less poking today, whatever that was. But if I didn't do it now, I would despise myself. Right now, by pure chance, I had been given a round free time to formulate my statement, before Linda woke up, and one good thing the night's events had at least brought with it: I knew, that she didn't belong with Rissen, but with me.
In the dim light from the night lamp, I wrote a draft of the statement. The thorough justification was an easy matter, as often as I had gone over it in my mind. Everything I said to Karrek in general terms I repeated eloquently and convincingly. I still had plenty of time, and sitting in bed I wrote the document cleanly, neat enough to have been done with a fountain pen against the background of a Chemical Journal. I signed my name and address resolutely, because it had to be, and on an envelope I wrote the address of the police. Three quarters of an hour I used to read over and over again what I had written and ponder over my new displeasure and hesitation. Not until the neighbor's alarm clock rang and reminded me that the deadline was almost up, I put Karrek's secret sign in one corner,
Linda woke up when our bell also rang. We looked at each other as if the night had been a dream. Before all this actually happened, I had imagined a completely different morning, when I myself sat as victor and judge and prescribed the victor's terms for a naked and broken Linda, who must ste surrender to grace and disfavor. But it didn't turn out that way.
We just got up, dressed, ate in silence, took the elevator together and parted outside the metro station. When I turned to see if she had disappeared, I noticed that she too turned - and nodded. I was hooked. Was she perhaps still thinking of putting me to sleep in safety and then taking revenge? But for some reason on the other side of all reason, I didn't think so. When she immediately disappeared into the subway gap, I turned around and put the letter on the drawer.
Weird with the little sign in the corner. I knew Karrek well enough to know that it would wipe Rissen off the face of the earth. In the middle of the street, in the throng of fellow soldiers hurrying to morning exercise and work, I suddenly stood still for a moment, struck by the terrible consciousness of power. I could repeat my maneuver at any time. As long as I didn't clash with Karrek's own interests, he would gladly sacrifice me a dozen lives for the service I did him. I had power.
I have spoken before about the stairs I saw as the image of life. A rather innocent picture, if ridiculous; the image of an obedient schoolboy's wandering from class to class, a proper servant's promotion through the ranks. With a feeling of disgust, I suddenly found myself standing on the top ledge. Not as if I lacked imagination to imagine higher degrees of power than that of standing in the favor of the chief of police in Kemistaden no. 4. There I had imagination, I had material to build off, if I wanted to imagine greater heights and wider prospects: the military hierarchy, the capital's ministries - Tuareg, Lavris. But the little bit of power I saw in front of me right now was enough to symbolize everything. And that disgusted me.
Of course it was true, of course it was desirable that a pest like Rissen was exterminated. It wasn't that. But I struggled with doubt that such a war of extermination would get very far at all. A few days ago it had seemed simple enough to me: you killed Rissen, then Rissen was gone, also Rissen within myself, because he was grafted there by the other, the live. You killed Rissen, and then you were a true fellow soldier again, a happy, healthy cell in the State's organism. Since then, something had happened that made me uncertain: the event of the night - my failure with Linda.
That it was a failure I could not hide from myself. True enough, that I was told what I wanted - that she did not stand in the way of my decision regarding Rissen. True enough, that at bottom I was not afraid of any revenge on her part, as she was, after all, just as intractable and Undoubtedly bound to me as I to her. True enough, that I now had her in my power, that I was in possession of secrets that she did not want exposed. True enough, all of it. So it wasn't a failure, if I only thought about the stupid limited goal I set for myself. And yet it was a thorough, abject failure in another and greater way.
Her words about the enviable unrequited love sounded girlishly romantic, but they still contained a kind of truth, which I could very well apply to my own relationship to Wind. My marriage had been an unhappy love in a way, answered indeed, but unhappy all the same. In a serious face, in a tense red bowed mouth, in two strict wide-open eyes, I had dreamed into a secretive world, which would quench my thirst , relieve my anxiety, give me final security for all time, if only I knew a means to get in there. And now - now I had forced my way in as far as it was possible to go in, forced myself into what she would not give me, and yet my thirst was left, my worry and my uncertainty greater than ever. Was there a counterpart to my dream world, then it was inaccessible to all my efforts of strength. And I, like Linda, was ready to wish myself back to my enviable illusion, when I still believed that paradise behind the wall could be conquered.
What connection this had with my disgust for power, I had a hard time really clarifying, but I sensed that the connection was there. I sensed that even when they killed Rissen, it would turn out to be a blow in the air. The way I achieved what I imagined about Linda, found out what I wanted to know and yet failed so deeply that I could without exaggeration speak of despair , then I could also achieve what I imagined in the matter of Rissen - a sentence, an execution - and still not have come an inch further towards what I was really striving for after.
For the first time in my life I sensed what power was, felt it in my hand like a weapon - and despaired. The sixteenth chapter
A whisper went through the police station. No one knew anything, no one had said anything definite, but everyone had heard it like half a breath, meeting in stairs and corridors without witnesses within earshot: "The Minister of Police myself - Tuareg - have you heard that - detained - just a rumor - detained for anti-state mentality - tsss - -"
What did Karrek think about this, I wondered to myself, he who was so close to the Tuareg and who himself had been so eager to get the new law implemented? Did he know about it? Maybe it was even him - - -?
I had nothing to do with the reputation, I threw myself into the work.
At the dinner table I no longer avoided meeting Rissen's gaze. If he saw me now, it would in any case be too late for him to parry the blow. Besides, I had a strange feeling that he wasn't quite real. What sat there at the table, sniffing its handkerchief, quite tangible and noisy, was a kind of mirage, a comparatively harmless reflection of an evil principle, which I wanted to bring to life . I had struck, and in the next moment the blow would hit - the mirror image. Still, I tried to tell myself that it was exactly the same thing.
Not until on the way home did the sleeping sensation of dreaming leave. My feet felt heavy when I thought that I had to see Linda again. I had a free evening ahead of me, and pretty soon we would be alone with each other, the two of us, eye to eye. I didn't know how to bear it.
Then that moment came. She must have been waiting for it. Today it was she who pulled out the chairs and she who turned on the radio - but none of us heard the program, just as little now as then.
We sat in silence for a long time. I searched her face furtively - it seemed to be working in there behind the immobility. But she was silent. If I had been mistaken - if my fears this morning had been true?
- Have you entered me? I asked in a thick voice.
She shook her head.
- But you plan to do it?
- No, Leo, no no.
Then she was silent again, and there was no question I could ask. I didn't know how to stand it. Finally, I closed my eyes and leaned back in my chair, surrendering to something unknown, but inevitable. In the memory there appeared a young man, whom we had under the syringe, he who had first spoken about the secret gatherings in the sect of fools. He had said something about the awfulness of silence, about how helpless and exposed silence is, and I understood him just now.
- I want to talk to you, she finally said with difficulty. A long time. You must listen. Do you want that?
- Yes, I said. Linda, I have hurt you.
She smiled a small trembling smile.
- You have broken me open like a can, with violence, she said. But it is not enough. Afterwards, I understood that either I must die of shame, or I must also continue voluntarily. May I continue? Do you want some more of me, Leo?
I could not answer, and from now on I cannot account for what happened within myself, because not the least part of me did anything but listen. I have the definite opinion that up until then I had never listened in my entire life. What I previously called listening was essentially different from this. By then my ears had done their job, my thoughts had done their job, my memory had registered everything perfectly and my interest was still somewhere else, I don't know where. Now: I knew nothing other than what she told, lost in it, where she was.
- You already know something about me, Leo. You know that I have dreamed of killing you. Last night, when all the shame and fear was gone, I thought I could, but now I know I can't. I can only dream desperate dreams. And yet I don't think it's fear of punishment that stops me. Maybe I can explain it later. There is something else I want to talk to you about now. I want to talk about the children, and that - and what I have found out about the children. It is long. I have never dared to say anything about it. I'll start from the beginning, with Ossu.
- Do you remember when I went with Ossu? Do you remember that we always had it clear to us that it must be a boy? I don't know if you were just buying into my wishful thinking, but at least you said you also thought it would be a boy. You know, I think I would have been terribly offended if it had been a girl - I would have taken it as an injustice to me, who was such a loyal fellow soldier, that I myself would gladly die, if a means had been invented, so that women became superfluous. Yes, before I perceived them as a necessary evil - still necessary. Of course I found out that we were officially considered as valuable or almost as valuable as men - but only secondarily, only so that we could give birth to new men , and new women are also understood, which in turn could give birth to new men. And as much as it stung my arm - you want so much to have a small, small value, no, that's not true, you want a big big value - as much as it hurt, at least I admitted that I wasn't worth that much. Women aren't as good as men, I told myself, they don't have as much body strength, can't lift as heavy, don't harden as well in the rain of bombs, their nerves aren't just as capable in a field battle, they are generally worse warriors, worse fellow soldiers than the men. They are just a means to produce warriors. That you put them as high officially, it is a courtesy, everyone knows that it is a courtesy, so that they are happy and accommodating. There may come a time, I thought, when it turns out that women are superfluous, as you can save their ovaries and throw the rest into the sewer. Then the whole State can be filled with men, and you don't have to waste any money on providing girls with nutrition and education. Of course, it was a strangely empty feeling sometimes knowing that you were just a storage room, necessary for the time being, but far too precious. Well, but when I was honest enough to admit it - it wouldn't have been too much of a disappointment if the first time I gave birth I had Something that was also just a storage room? But it didn't turn out that way, fortunately Ossu was a man-to-be, I almost got a sentence. I was so loyal at one time, Leo. and you don't have to throw away any costs to give girls nutrition and education. Of course, it was a strangely empty feeling sometimes knowing that you were just a storage room, necessary for the time being, but far too precious. Well, but when I was honest enough to admit it - it wouldn't have been too much of a disappointment if the first time I gave birth I had Something that was also just a storage room? But it didn't turn out that way, fortunately Ossu was a man-to-be, I almost got a sentence. I was so loyal at one time, Leo. and you don't have to throw away any costs to give girls nutrition and education. Of course, it was a strangely empty feeling sometimes knowing that you were just a storage room, necessary for the time being, but far too precious. Well, but when I was honest enough to admit it - it wouldn't have been too much of a disappointment if the first time I gave birth I had Something that was also just a storage room? But it didn't turn out that way, fortunately Ossu was a man-to-be, I almost got a sentence. I was so loyal at one time, Leo. if the first time I gave birth I had received something that was also just a storage room? But it didn't turn out that way, fortunately Ossu was a man-to-be, I almost got a sentence. I was so loyal at one time, Leo. if the first time I gave birth I had received something that was also just a storage room? But it didn't turn out that way, fortunately Ossu was a man-to-be, I almost got a sentence. I was so loyal at one time, Leo.
- Yes, then I saw him grow and start walking, and in the meantime I went with Maryl. After I stopped nursing him, I only saw him in the mornings and evenings, before I went to work in the morning and when I came home in the evening - but it was so strange. I knew with all my conviction that he was the State's, that he was already being brought up in the nursery all day long into a future fellow soldier and that the same upbringing would then continue in the children's camp and the youth camp. Except for the inheritance, which I knew was important - and in our case fully in order, as long as it could be controlled - and which, after all, is not "our" property either , because it is inherited from other fellow soldiers before us - so I had it very clear to me that his future being depended on his bosses in the nursery, in the children's camp, in the youth camp, by their own example and by the rules they followed in their upbringing. But I couldn't help but notice a series of funny quirks, which I recognized from you and myself. I noticed his way of wrinkling his nose, and I thought: So funny, I did that myself when I was little! - In this way, I came back in my son. It was a proud feeling: in him I was almost going to grow up to be a man! And I noticed his laugh, which reminds so much of yours. In that way, I almost got to be part of your childhood. And the way he turned his head, you know, and something in the shape of his eyes - - It wasn't strange at all, but it gave me a criminal sense of ownership. "It is felt that he is ours", I thought, "son", I added guiltily, because I knew it wasn't a loyal feeling. It wasn't, no, but it was there. The worst part was that it got stronger, and strongest when it came to the little unborn I was carrying. - You remember, perhaps, that Maryl's birth was complicated and took a long time? It's certainly superstition, but I imagined even then, and I haven't been able to get rid of the thought, that it was because I was so unwilling to let her go. When Ossu was born, I was another mother completely in the spirit of the State, one who only gives birth to the State. When Maryl was born, I was a selfish, stingy female animal, one who gave birth to herself and thought she had a right to what she gave birth to. My conscience told me that I was wrong, that such thoughts should not be thought, but no feelings of guilt and shame could drive away that greed that had awakened in me. If I have any tendencies for lust for power - they are not great, Leo, admit it! - but they exist - so they appeared in the time after Maryl's birth. The short moments Ossu was home, I ruled over him, ruled over him as much as I could, just to feel that he was still mine. And he obeyed - because you learn something in childhood, it is first and foremost to obey orders, and I knew that at least I had One more time, it belonged to the State's will and the upbringing of fellow soldiers. But those were just preliminaries. My attitude towards Ossu was not really something done to the State. It was an attempt to extract all of the ownership rights that could be extracted in the short time I still had him in the home.
- When Maryl was born, I was surprised myself at how calm I took that she was a girl, maybe not just calm for the rest: I was even satisfied. She wasn't primarily the State's as much as a boy would have been, she was more mine - she was more me, because she was a girl.
- How should I describe what I then got to be a part of? You know, Maryl is a strange child. She was neither you nor me. It is possible that some grandparents or grandparents have appeared in her being - but I didn't know that, and it was so far back. She was simply Maryl. It sounds so simple, but it was so strange. She must have seen things in her own way even then, even before she could speak. And then - well, you know. You know that she is something for herself.
- I noticed that my greedy grip had loosened. Maryl was not mine. For long moments I could sit and hear how she sang to herself, or read or what I should call it - fantastic dream stories, which she had never learned in childhood the ¥ning. Where did she get them from? Dream stories can't follow the heredity and appear late! She had her own melody, and she didn't get it from us and not from the nursery. Do you understand that the thought made me giddy and terrified? She was Maryl. She was not the same as anyone else. Not a formless clay, which you or I or the State just had to shape according to any pattern. Not my property and creation. I was fascinated by my own child, in a new, shy, alien way. When she was near me, I was still and waiting. It occurred to me that Ossu was also something for himself, although he had already come so far that he understood to hide. I regretted being so greedy of him, and I finally left him alone. That time was full of wonder and excitement and life.
- Then I discovered that there was a new child on the way. Nothing was more natural - but for me it became something overwhelming. That I was scared is not the right expression. I wasn't afraid of anything happening to me, not of the birth or anything like that. I was so terrified that I thought I discerned the unimaginable for the first time. It would be my third child, and yet I thought I had never known what it was like to give birth until then. It no longer occurred to me that I was an expensive production machine. I wasn't a greedy owner either. What was I then? I do not know. One who was not himself in control of what happened - and yet almost lifted to ecstasy because it had to happen through me.
- That's how long I have to speak, and yet I don't know if you understand me. I mean: if you understand, that there is something below and behind us. That it is created in us. I know that it must not be said here, because it is only the State that owns us. But I'm still telling you. Everything is pointless otherwise.
She fell silent, and I sat speechless, although I felt as if I wanted to scream. Here is everything I have fought against, I thought as if in a dream. All that I have fought against and been afraid of and longed for.
She knew nothing of the fools and their desert city, and yet she would fall under the law as inexorably as they, she who dreamed of a context other than that of the State. Also: I would do it myself. Didn't I already feel this other connection, lawless and inviolable, between her and me!
I was shaking from head to toe. I wanted to say: yes, yes! It would have been a relief like when a completely exhausted person is allowed to fall asleep. I was released from a context that kept suffocating me and rescued into a new, self-evident, simple one, which carried but did not bind.
My lips wrestled with words that did not exist and could not be said. I wanted to go, I wanted to shop, I wanted to break everything and make everything new. There was no world for me anymore, no place to live. Nothing but the solid connection between Linda and me.
I walked over to her, knelt on the floor and put my head in her lap.
I don't know if anyone has done that before or if anyone will do it again. I've never heard of it. I only know that I had to, and that it contained everything I wanted to say and couldn't.
She must have understood that. She put her hand on my head. We remained in that position for a long, long time. Seventeenth chapter
Late at night I ran up and said:
- I have to save Rissen. I have indicated Rissen.
She didn't ask. I rushed up to the porter, woke him up and asked to borrow the house phone. When he heard that it was about a conversation with the chief of police, he made no difficulties.
It was impossible to get to Karrek, he had given strict orders that no one was to disturb him at night. After a lot of fussing and running here and there, a reasonable guard finally came to the phone and reassured me that no business could be decided tonight. If, on the other hand, I wanted to meet the chief of police an hour before working hours tomorrow morning, he would in any case inform him, and I could arrive on time and listen to see if he accepted.
I turned back to Linda.
Still she didn't ask. I don't know if it was because she understood everything or because she was waiting for me to say something myself. But I couldn't speak, not yet. My tongue had always been a smooth and reliable tool, but now it refused to do service any more. Just as I had just listened for the first time in my life, I knew that if I now wanted to speak, it must be in a new way, as I was not yet mature for. The layers of myself, which would now come to speak, had probably never formed any words before. It wasn't needed yet either. I had said what I had to - and Linda had understood me - when I put my head in her lap.
We were silent again, but it was a silence of a different kind than the one that had tormented me before. Now it was just that we waited patiently together, and we were over the hardest part.
At night, when none of us could sleep, Linda said:
- Do you think there are more people who have been involved in this? Perhaps among your subjects. I have to find them.
I thought of the transparent little woman, whom I had pushed out of her false confidence with such envious pleasure. What bitter distrust had she arrived at now? I thought of the sect of fools, who were allowed to sleep among armed men. They were all in prison by now.
Later she said:
- Do you think there are more people who have been there - others? Who has begun to understand what it is to give birth? Other mothers? Or father? Or loving? Who have not dared to say what they have seen, but dare when someone else dares. I have to find them.
I thought of the woman with the deep voice, the one who had spoken of the organic and the organized. Had she escaped prison, I didn't know where she was anyway.
And later, far away, as if from a sea of ​​sleep:
- Maybe a new world of those who are mothers can grow - either they are men or women, and either they have given birth to children or not. But where are they?
Then I ran up and became wide awake and thought of Rissen, who had always known what was in me and groped and searched for it, until I had given him over to death . I moaned loudly and pushed myself hard to Linda. Eighteenth chapter
An hour before working hours, I showed up at the police station. Karrek accepted.
I understood, what a real waiting service it was, that he got up so early to receive me, to the shop without knowing my case. He probably expected something completely different from what I had to come up with, a revelation of some huge spy league or something like that.
- I - I put that sign on - - -, I started stammering.
- I don't know of any signs, he said softly and coldly. What do you mean, fellow soldier Kall?
I understood that he claimed to have witnesses. Even in a police station there are wires in the wall, ears and eyes to be reckoned with, and there are certainly circumstances where the chief of police himself has to be careful ¤l. I thought of the whispered rumor about the Tuareg.
- I was wrong, I said (as if that would help anything!). I mean - I mean: I have submitted an entry. I just intend - ask to have it back.
With a face of extreme friendliness, Karrek called and had a packet of papers brought in, where he searched for my declaration letter. He let my wait be long, before he looked up with a twinkle in his eye.
- Impossible, he said. Even if the named person was not already in custody - and he is - the police would of course not be able to fail to take into account such an extraordinarily well-founded accusation. Your request is not granted.
I stared at his face, but it was expressionless in its charged immobility. Either he was being watched, and then he didn't dare show any concession to my pleas, especially not after my crazy opening words. Or also - I had already been in trouble. What use was Karrek for a henchman who failed!
In any case, it was impossible to speak frankly with the chief of police right now.
- In that case, I said, I can only pray - that - that - he is not sentenced to death at least.
- It is not at all in my area to decide such things, Karrek said coldly. His sentence depends entirely on the judge. Incidentally, I can inform you that his case has already been assigned to a certain judge, but I do not think I have the right to tell you the name, as it would be a clearly criminal act to attempt ¥seek a judge in advance.
I felt my legs give out under me and had to grab hold of the desk to keep from falling. Karrek didn't notice, or pretended not to notice. In my distress, I thought: if he is now being watched and does not dare to show his old friendship, maybe he will still help me later, secretly. All this is just a game. I have always been able to put my hope in him before.
I scoffed, saw Karrek grin wickedly, and heard him say with honeyed politeness:
- It might interest you to know that it will be you who gets to carry out the calocaine injection in the case of Edo Rissen. You are the closest to it, because the regular injector itself is under the syringe. They could have appointed one of the course participants, but they thought they wanted to prove that honor to you.
Only later did the suspicion hit me that this was not true, that Karrek only at that moment felt like forcing me to join, either to bring me back to order and energy with such drastic measures - or simply just to torture me.
In any case, it turned out as he said. After the midday break, I was called to the court investigation in the Edo Rissen case, and I kept my course participants busy as best I could. Behind me, I had such a chaotic morning that I was close to canceling several times and blaming illness. The fact that I managed to stay up after all was because I had to, that I wanted to be part of Rissen's investigation and judgment, less to influence the course of things - I hardly thought it was possible - even to once again see and hear the man I had been so afraid of and believed to hate me so deeply.
In the interrogation room, a fairly considerable crowd was already gathered. I made out the tall military man who served as judge and the two secretaries who sat staring at their empty notepads. At the judge's side sat people in military and police uniforms - probably advisory specialists in various fields, psychologists, state ethicists, economists and others - and in an ascending semicircle in front of all of these sat the course participants, Rissen's own course participants , in work uniform. At first I saw their faces as skin-colored fog spots in the uniform mist. Then it occurred to me to see how they reacted. With effort I held a couple of faces, one after the other, but they seemed like masks. I released them, and they floated out into the mist as before. At the same moment, the door opened and Rissen was brought in handcuffed.
He looked around the hall without attaching himself to anyone in particular, not even to me. And why would he have stuck with me? He could neither know that I had set him up nor that I devoured his every move and expression in hungry despair. A glimmer of hope passed through me: maybe not just me - maybe someone more than me was sitting here with the same hungry despair behind the mask? Maybe many?
When he sat down in the chair, inconspicuously civil as was his habit - sometimes you could think that he almost disappeared in the middle of his firm physicality, perhaps because he did not crowd on one thing more than things and trees and animals do - he closed his eyes and smiled. It was a helpless and slightly tired smile, which had no business with anyone - as if he constantly realized his absolute loneliness and found himself in it, even sought himself to rest in it, as I can imagine a sleepy polar wanderer seeking rest in the cold, even though he knows it will put him to sleep forever. And while the callocaine worked, this helpless smile spread like peace over his scarred face. If it took hours before he spoke, you couldn't tear your eyes away from it. Where had I had my eyes before, because I never noticed what a peculiar dignity there was in this civil and mildly leisured man, whom I had always found ridiculous! A dignity, which was completely separate from the strict military dignity, because it consisted in a complete indifference to how he acted. When he opened his eyes and began to speak, one had the impression that he could just as easily sit there reclining in any chair, staring up into the white light of the ceiling and speaking without a drop of callocaine in himself, spoken in the same terms as now, so that the fear and the shame that held the rest of us back had been eaten up by loneliness and hopelessness in him. I could have gone to him myself and asked him to speak, and maybe he would have done it, voluntarily like Linda, just as a gift. He would tell me everything I wanted to hear, about the fools and their secret tradition, about the desert city, and about himself, how he had been forced into the unknown in his way as Linda had been forced in hers - everything, about I had not chosen to play enemy in my wild fear, when I felt that something forbidden in me responded to his tone with the same timbre and would never allow itself to be silenced again. He would have spoken longer then than you could get him to speak now, perhaps about more important things, and made me aware of realities within myself, which I would now never discover. I had no overwhelming pity for him that he should be judged and die, but I was wild with bitterness at having mutilated myself by entering him. And I listened as engrossingly as I had listened to Linda, only with greater anxiety. and about himself, how he had been forced into the unknown in his way as Linda had been forced in hers - everything, if I hadn't chosen to play the enemy in my wild fear, when I felt that something forbidden in me responded to his tone with the same tone and would never allow itself to be silenced again. He would have spoken longer then than you could get him to speak now, perhaps about more important things, and made me aware of realities within myself, which I would now never discover. I had no overwhelming pity for him that he should be judged and die, but I was wild with bitterness at having mutilated myself by entering him. And I listened as engrossingly as I had listened to Linda, only with greater anxiety. and about himself, how he had been forced into the unknown in his way as Linda had been forced in hers - everything, if I hadn't chosen to play the enemy in my wild fear, when I felt that something forbidden in me responded to his tone with the same tone and would never allow itself to be silenced again. He would have spoken longer then than you could get him to speak now, perhaps about more important things, and made me aware of realities within myself, which I would now never discover. I had no overwhelming pity for him that he should be judged and die, but I was wild with bitterness at having mutilated myself by entering him. And I listened as engrossingly as I had listened to Linda, only with greater anxiety. if I had not chosen to play enemy in my wild fear, when I felt that something forbidden in me responded to his tone with the same timbre and would never allow itself to be silenced again. He would have spoken longer then than you could get him to speak now, perhaps about more important things, and made me aware of realities within myself, which I would now never discover. I had no overwhelming pity for him that he should be judged and die, but I was wild with bitterness at having mutilated myself by entering him. And I listened as engrossingly as I had listened to Linda, only with greater anxiety. if I had not chosen to play enemy in my wild fear, when I felt that something forbidden in me responded to his tone with the same timbre and would never allow itself to be silenced again. He would have spoken longer then than you could get him to speak now, perhaps about more important things, and made me aware of realities within myself, which I would now never discover. I had no overwhelming pity for him that he should be judged and die, but I was wild with bitterness at having mutilated myself by entering him. And I listened as engrossingly as I had listened to Linda, only with greater anxiety. He would have spoken longer then than you could get him to speak now, perhaps about more important things, and made me aware of realities within myself, which I would now never discover. I had no overwhelming pity for him that he should be judged and die, but I was wild with bitterness at having mutilated myself by entering him. And I listened as engrossingly as I had listened to Linda, only with greater anxiety. He would have spoken longer then than you could get him to speak now, perhaps about more important things, and made me aware of realities within myself, which I would now never discover. I had no overwhelming pity for him that he should be judged and die, but I was wild with bitterness at having mutilated myself by entering him. And I listened as engrossingly as I had listened to Linda, only with greater anxiety.
I had wanted to know something about him himself. But he didn't talk about anything personal. General questions filled him to the breaking point.
- Exactly, he said, exactly. So here I am then. As it must be. A matter of time. To tell the truth. Can you hear the truth, you? Not everyone is truthful enough to hear the truth, that's the sad thing. It could be a bridge between man and man - as long as it is voluntary, yes - as long as it is given as a gift and received as a gift. Isn't it strange that everything loses its value as soon as it ceases to be a gift - even the truth? No, of course you haven't noticed, because then you would see that you were stripped bare, stripped to the bare bones - and who can bear to see that! Who wants to see his wretchedness, before he has to! Not forced by people. Forced by the void and the cold - the fimbul cold, which threatens us all. community, you say - community? Welded together? And you shout that from each side of an abyss. Was there no point, not a single one, not a single one, in the long development of the families, where you could have chosen a different path? Does the road have to go over the abyss? No point where you could stop the tank of Power from rolling towards the void? Is there any way beyond death to new life? Is there a holy place, where the tide turns?
- I have pondered for years, where that place could be. If we are to be there, when we have swallowed the neighboring state, or the neighboring state has swallowed us? Will roads grow between people as easily as roads grow between cities and districts? May it only come soon then. May it come, may it come, with all its horrors! Or does that not help either? Has the armored car grown so strong before then, that it can no longer be transformed from god to tool? Can a god, if he is also the deadliest of all gods, ever give up his power voluntarily? - I so wanted to believe that there was a green depth in man, an ocean of undamaged growth power, which melted all the dead remains in its huge container and healed and created forever... But I have not seen it. What I know is, that even sicker children are raised by sick parents and sick teachers, until the sick has become the norm and the healthy a horror. From the lonely, even more lonesome are born, from the saved, even more saved. - - - Where could a single remnant of health have remained hidden to grow and break through the armor! - - The poor people, whom we called fools, played with their symbols. There was still something - at least they knew there was something they were missing. As long as they knew what they were doing, there was still something left. But it leads nowhere! Where can anything lead! If I stood at a subway station when the crowds were at their thickest, or at a large party meeting with loudspeakers in front of me - my cries would still not be heard much longer than to a few eardrums in the million-mile World State, and from them they would bounce back like empty noise. I am a cog. I am a being that they have taken life from. - - And yet: right now I know it's not true. It's the callocaine of course, it makes me irrationally hopeful - everything will be easy and clear and calm. In any case, I'm alive - despite everything they've taken from me - and right now I know that what I am is leading somewhere. I have seen the powers of death spread over the world in wider and wider rings - but then must not the powers of life also have their rings, even though I have not been able to distinguish them? - - Yes, yes, I know that it is the callocaine that works, but can it not be true for that? It's the callocaine of course, it makes me irrationally hopeful - everything will be easy and clear and calm. In any case, I'm alive - despite everything they've taken from me - and right now I know that what I am is leading somewhere. I have seen the powers of death spread over the world in wider and wider rings - but then must not the powers of life also have their rings, even though I have not been able to distinguish them? - - Yes, yes, I know that it is the callocaine that works, but can it not be true for that? It's the callocaine of course, it makes me irrationally hopeful - everything will be easy and clear and calm. In any case, I'm alive - despite everything they've taken from me - and right now I know that what I am is leading somewhere. I have seen the powers of death spread over the world in wider and wider rings - but then must not the powers of life also have their rings, even though I have not been able to distinguish them? - - Yes, yes, I know that it is the callocaine that works, but can it not be true for that? although I have not been able to distinguish them? - - Yes, yes, I know that it is the callocaine that works, but can it not be true for that? although I have not been able to distinguish them? - - Yes, yes, I know that it is the callocaine that works, but can it not be true for that?
On the way to the examination room, wild fantasies had swirled around in my brain - how all the audience at once for some mysterious reason directed their attention elsewhere ll and I came to whisper my questions in Rissen's ear... Even then I knew that it was a daydream that could not come true, and of course it also turned out that not a single one of the listeners, even less all at once, Rissen released with his attentive eyes. But strangely enough: even if I had the chance, I wouldn't have anything to ask. What did I care about the Ã–ken city more, what did I care about the traditions of fools! No desert city was so inaccessible and so secure as the one I was on my way to, and it was not miles away in an unknown direction, but near, near. Linda would stay.
Rissen sighed and closed his eyes, but opened them again.
- They know! he murmured, his smirk brightening and less helpless. They are scared, they set themselves up for counter-defense - so they anticipate. My wife knows when she doesn't want to hear, but shuts me up. The course participants know when they put on their most superior faces and make fun of me. It could have been one of them who indicated me, my wife or one of the course participants. Whoever has done it - has guessed. When I speak, they hear themselves. When I move and exist, it is myself they become afraid of. Ã…, if it still wanted to exist, the green depth, the indestructible - and now I think it exists. It's the callocaine, but I'm still glad - that I - - can believe it - - -
- My boss, I said to the judge in a voice that I tried in vain to steady, may I give him another syringe? He is already waking up.
But the judge shook his head.
- That's enough, he said. The case is clear enough already. Or, my advisers - do you not agree with me in that case?
The counselors murmured in agreement and withdrew with the judge to deliberate. Just as they opened the door to the next room, something unexpected happened. A young man from Rissen's course sprang from his seat in the middle of the rising semicircle, dashed down to the podium, where I was relieving the subject's nausea upon awakening, and drew wildly t the outgoing to stay.
- It's me who caused all this! he cried in despair. It was I who indicated my boss Edo Rissen for anti-state mentality! This morning on the way to work I put my notice in the mailbox; when I arrived he was already in custody! But everyone here who has heard him - - everyone here who has heard him - - must realize - -
I had stepped down from the podium, walked up to the young man and put my hand over his mouth.
- Calm down, I whispered, you win nothing, you make yourself miserable and save no one. Others have also listed him.
Out loud I said:
- Such disturbing behavior by people who have fallen out of balance must absolutely not be allowed while the investigation is in progress. You fellow soldiers on the first bench, you want to pour a glass of water and reach here. You have to understand and apologize that it confuses a loyal youth when he is forced to name his boss. - But calm down, calm down, you certainly don't need to take it so hard. You certainly don't have to stand up and defend yourself in public. You are fully justified though.
Confused, he drank the water and stared at me. When he pretended to say something more, I energetically silenced him and promised to talk to him after the examination was over. He sat down at the end of the first bench and closed his eyes.
When I ran back onto the podium, Rissen had fully woken up. He sat still and looked straight into the air, and still smiled to himself in his solitude, but now the smile was bitter. Suddenly he got up unsteadily from his chair and took a few steps out towards the hall. I neither could nor wanted to stop him.
- You who have heard me - -, he began with a voice that penetrated into the smallest corner, and yet he did not shout, but spoke darkly and softly. Until I die I will hear the timbre and intensity of his dark low voice. Two policemen, who had been standing ready in the background all along, rushed forward, gagged him and led him back to the chair. The hall was deathly silent, when finally the judge, followed by the advisers, stepped steadily and measuredly onto the podium and took his place to deliver the verdict. The whole hall stood up. Rissen was also picked up by the two policemen.
- A bacillus carrier can be disinfected, said the judge in a solemn, commanding tone. But an individual who, through his very attitude, his very spirit, spreads dissatisfaction with all our institutions, despair about the future, defeatism in the matter of the neighboring state's rseek to raid against our areas, he can never be disinfected. He is harmful to the State in whatever place and in whatever work he is and cannot be neutralized except by death. I deliver this verdict in agreement, if not with most, then with the best of the advice I have received from the experts appointed for that purpose. Edo Rissen is sentenced to death.
A solemn silence met the pronounced sentence. The young man, my co-donor, sat rigid in his seat, white as a sheet. Rissen, still gagged, was led out. When the door closed behind him, I was right next to it. Without knowing it, I had followed him step by step as far as I could go.
When I then looked around, the young man was gone. Since he was one of the course participants, you must still be able to get hold of him. My thoughts mechanically pursued some everyday questions: who will now lead Rissen's course, probably one of the oldest disciples, who will lead my course if I take over Rissens, yes there are so many people to take, but really we couldn't afford to get rid of a single one, soon this course will finally be finished, so you can pray ¶rja with a new one... It was the rattle of a mill grinding blanks. I myself was somewhere where it was still and dark.
When I returned to my own lecture hall and stood in front of a listening semi-circle, deceptively similar to the one I had left, except for the judges and advisers, I must I even finally blame nausea and go home. I couldn't play comedy anymore.
I went into the parents' room, closed the door behind me, folded out the bed and threw myself on top of it in a sort of half-sleep. The bedside lamp burned, the fan whirred; outside I heard the maid's steps and chores. I heard the door slam again as she went to collect the children. Then Maryl's and Laila's voices and commotion and the housekeeper's attempt to silence them. I heard the creaking of the food elevator and the clatter as the plates were brought out. But I didn't hear Linda's voice, which was the only thing I was waiting for.
A knock on the door made me jump up, and the maid asked in the doorway:
- Would you like food, my boss?
I straightened my hair and went out. But Linda wasn't there. It was already well past the usual dinner time. In vain I searched my memory for something that she would have for herself - she used to at least always come home and eat first - but for Linda's sake it was not enough to show any hesitation before the home help.
- Oh, yes, of course, I said hesitantly, I want to remember that she said that she would be gone... Careless of me, I've completely forgotten what it was.
The children had to go to bed, and I waited some more. The home help went, but no Linda had come. In my anxiety, I got up and called the Accident Center without caring what the porter would think. During the course of the day, of course, some accidents had occurred in Kemistaden No. 4, a couple of traffic accidents on lines that I didn't know about and several striking ventilator systems with two deaths and a couple of unsafe cases , but all in other districts than where Linda worked.
The worst part was that I couldn't sit and wait any longer. A party was being celebrated in my regiment that evening, and I could not be absent without a compelling reason. I wouldn't have been able to manage my work, but sitting and letting speeches and lectures and drumbeats go through my ears, I would still be able to do that. Only I had known where Linda was.
She had talked about looking people up. She wanted to find others who had also reached that self-evident togetherness. But did she know where they were? Where had she started her search?
When it was time, I went - purely mechanically, without it having occurred to me that I could be truant.
I would never see Linda again. Nineteenth chapter
It had been my intention to listen to the lecture, but it didn't go well. Time and time again, I took inner strength to collect myself, and time and time again I managed to follow some sentences. That much I remember, that it was about the development of state life from the most primitive division, where the individual, each a lonely center, lived in constant uncertainty - uncertainty against the forces of nature and insecurity vis-à-vis other similar lonely centers - and to the finished State, which was the individuals' only meaning and justification and gave them a security without flaw or blemish. - That was the common thread, but I couldn't repeat closer details, if it concerned life. Hardly had I again forced myself to attention, until the thoughts of Linda and Rissen and the new world that existed and wanted to come made me forget everything around me. When I awoke from my musings, I could hardly sit still. Not only my insides, but my tendons and muscles cried out for a breakup. If I couldn't get started right away, I would be blown up by my own strength at any moment - that's how it felt.
Finally, I approached the exit, in the middle of the lecture. The police secretary on the nearest corner frowned disapprovingly, and the doorman stopped me with a questioning look. I said my name and showed my aboveground license as proof of identity.
- Forgive me, fellow soldier, but I feel terribly ill, I said. I imagine it will be better if I can get up in the fresh air for a couple of minutes. I am sick, I have been in bed all day, I have to be away from my work...
He wrote down my name, noted the time I left and then let me out.
I took the elevator up. At the gatekeeper, I repeated my request and was also recorded here and released.
I stepped out onto the roof terrace.
At first I didn't know what was different. Something absolutely alien met me from the deserted terrace. I was deeply terrified without knowing why. After a couple of seconds I understood what scared me. The sound of airplanes, which used to fill the air night and day, was gone. It was quiet.
Inside the residential buildings, deep down in the work floors, I had experienced a relative silence, where the noise from the metro network and from the air was muffled by walls and layers of earth and where the fans went along faint, sleepy hum; a dulling of all sounds, always a relief and a rest, like when you feel sleep close its shell around you and you become alone, small and huddled together. The silence on the roof terrace was not like this relative silence. It was limitless. On night marches and on the way home from lectures and parties, I had countless times seen the stars shining out between the moving silhouettes of the plane, and what else was there? They still didn't shine bright enough to make the shielded flashlight redundant. I had once heard that they were suns far away, but I can't remember, that the information made a significant impression on me. In the boundless silence I now suddenly saw the spaces stretching from infinity to infinity and was dizzy with the huge void between the stars and the stars. A white-spanning Nothing took my breath away.
Then I heard something, which I had known and seen the effects of, but never heard before: the wind. A light night breeze, which crept between the walls and set the oleanders on the roof terrace in slow motion. And although it perhaps only filled a few districts with its fine whirring, with all my will I could not defend myself against an overpowering imagination, that it was the breath of the entire night space, that it was xte out of the darkness easily and naturally like when a child sighs in sleep. The night breathed, the night lived, and as far into infinity as I could see the stars pulsated like hearts, filling the void with wave upon wave of vibrating life.
When I awoke to consciousness of myself again, I sat on the wall around the roof terrace and froze, not from cold, as it was a warm, almost hot night, but from intense agitation. The wind was still blowing, although weaker, and I knew that it was not born from the darkness of space but from the layers of air near the earth. The stars still twinkled just as clearly, and I reminded myself that their pulse of light was an illusion. But that meant nothing. What I saw and heard could be mirages; it had only lent itself to the form of another world, a world from within - where I was used to encountering a dry, shriveled shell, which I called myself itself. I thought I had touched the living depth that Rissen called for and Linda felt and saw. "Don't you know that life flows here," the woman had said in my dream.
I didn't want to go back down to the party and the lecture. Now it was indifferent to me if anyone noticed my absence. The whole teeming activity, which was just now carried on in a thousand party and lecture halls underground in Kemistaden No. 4, seemed to me far away and unreal. I didn't belong there. I helped create a new world.
I wanted to go home, to Linda. And if she hadn't come, if I hadn't met her? So I wanted to continue, go to the young man who had also indicated Rissen, go to Rissen's wife... I didn't know where the young man lived, but I had the address of Rissen's floor; it was located in the laboratory district, where I had a license and could come and go as I pleased. He had said: "My wife suspects - my wife may have tipped me off." Had she resisted as desperately as I, then she was also close to understanding. First home, then to her. There was no doubt in me anymore. I helped create a new world.
No one appeared. As imperceptibly as possible, I slipped over the low wall that separated the roof terrace from the street. In the silence my steps echoed in a strange way, but it did not occur to me that I would attract any attention, nor was there anyone to stop me. With no aircraft in sight, the starlight was enough for me to find my way, and I didn't bother to turn on the flashlight. Although I was walking alone up here above ground, down here under the stars, I had a strange feeling of not being alone. As I was on my way to the unknown to search for the deep living context of the world, so maybe Linda was also on my way somewhere, I didn't know to whom. And wasn't it possible that right now someone else in the thousand cities of the World State was on the road like us, or perhaps had already arrived? Was it not possible that millions of people were on the road, openly or covertly, with or against their will - in the mighty World State, and why not also in the neighboring state ? Only a few days ago, such a thought would have made me recoil, but how can you limp at a state border, even a thousand miles away, when you have felt that even pulses are driven by the heart of the universe?
In the distance I heard the steps of the district guard in rhythmic march with a little pause and a little scraping for each time he changed completely. It was funny to hear such sounds out in the open air. What did the guard really think in his solitude about the silent night? Yes - what was I thinking myself? Only now did I have time to wonder where all this silence came from.
But just a moment. I could not solve the riddle, and I was indifferent to it. The only thing that mattered was the errand I was on.
Just then, a distant hum began to rise and grow into the roar of an engine. The planes were there again. Whether it was the previous stillness that made the noise so overwhelming or whether it really had never been this loud before, I couldn't tell. Anyway, it was so deafening that I had to lean against the wall while the eardrums got used to it.
The whole air was suddenly dark, thick and dark, but it teemed in the darkness in a way I didn't recognize. Right next to me, I felt more than saw how solid bodies filled the air around me. I pulled out my flashlight and pointed it straight in front of me. It hit a human form at a distance of half a meter. Paratroopers! Soon after, I had no less than ten stronger flashlights in my face and felt myself being grabbed around the arms by strong hands.
As I could only assume that the air fleet was having a night exercise, I shouted as loud as I could to drown out the alarm:
- I'm sick, I'm on my way to the metro station. Let me go, fellow soldiers!
Either they didn't listen or they had other orders - either way they didn't let me go. After they examined me and disarmed me - I was in police and military uniform for the sake of the party - I was tied tightly and loaded onto a kind of narrow tricycle, which some men hastily put together of light small parts and which seemed to be especially designed for prisoner transport. I was thus bolted into the back seat, not noticeably uncomfortable, but unable to move, while one of the soldiers jumped into the front seat and sped off.
I assumed that I had involuntarily joined the air force exercises as a toy and realized that the only thing I had to do was find myself in the postponement. In any case, sooner or later I would get to where I wanted to go.
Everywhere we rolled forward, our lantern cast a hasty light over a short stretch of road. A quarter of an hour ago, no human had been heard or seen. Now all the streets, all the squares, all the roof terraces were teeming with people, each one eagerly occupied with some particular work. I couldn't help but admire the organization of this huge night exercise. And the further we traveled, the further the work had also progressed. I saw barbed wiresfences being erected (would they really also have time to remove them by tomorrow morning, when people would be there for work?), I saw long hoses being laid out, containers of different kinds are flowing in different directions, guards guard all metro stations and all residential buildings. Now and then I also saw a tricycle with a prisoner like me on the back, and I wondered where they were going to take us.
In the square in front of a tent, which had been pitched on a roof terrace, the tricycles seemed to gather in a herd. The prisoners who were taken there - about twenty before me - had their feet but not their hands untied and were brought into the tent. Just inside the door, I collided with another prisoner, who resisted and all the time argued loudly that he, a district guard, was going to be subjected to a such play maneuvers. Who took care of his affairs in the meantime? How could he defend his absence tomorrow in front of the boss? - The noise from the engines was considerably weaker, as soon as you got inside the tent wall - it was equipped with a strong sound dampening device - so that you could now hear very well what he said, and I thought the soldiers around him could at least dignify him with an answer; until I suddenly heard two other soldiers exchanging a few words in a completely foreign language, of which I did not understand a word. We hadn't fallen victim to a night exercise at all. We were prisoners of the enemy.
To this day, I don't know how it all happened. One can imagine that the enemy had slowly and methodically possessed the air fleet place by place with spies and finally had every single plane under their command. One can perhaps also imagine a wildfire of rebellion and betrayal, for some reason that I do not know. The possibilities are many, all equally fantastic, and the only thing I know for sure is that there was no battle in the air, nor did I see any on the ground. It must have been a well-executed blunder.
The prisoners waited in line in an outer section of the tent house and were then let in one by one into an inner stall. There sat a senior military man with some interpreters and scribes around him. With a strong accent, he asked me in my own language about my name, profession, rank in the military and working life. One of the bystanders leaned forward and said something so low that I did not catch it, but I flinched when I saw his face. Wasn't it one of my own course participants? I wasn't quite sure. The manager looked up with an interested expression.
- Aha, he said, you are a chemical inventor? Have you made an important invention? Do you want to buy your life with it? Do you want to give us your invention?
For a long time afterwards, I pondered why I answered yes. It wasn't fear. I had been afraid almost all my life, I had been a coward - what does my whole book contain but the story of my cowardice! - but right then I wasn't afraid. All I had room for was an immeasurable disappointment that I would never reach those who were waiting. - Nor did I have a thought that my life would be something to hold on to under such circumstances as these. Prison or death seemed to me just then to be exactly the same. In both cases, my path to the others was interrupted. When I later realized that my invention had certainly not saved me, that my life would in any case be spared, that a large number of prisoners was a desirable gain for neighboring country, because the nativity there as little as here kept pace with the loss figures in the great wars - then it evoked no regrets, changed nothing in my attitude. I gave them my invention because I simply wanted it to remain. If Chemical City No. 4 was left in ruins, if the entire World State was turned into a desert of ash and stone, then I wanted to at least be able to imagine that somewhere in other countries and among other people a new Linda would speak as the first, voluntarily, where someone wanted to force her, and another crowd of terrified informers would listen to a new Rissen. It was superstition, of course, because nothing can be repeated, but I had nothing else to do. It was my only weak possibility to continue where I had been stopped.
How I was then transferred to a foreign city, to a foreign prison laboratory to work under surveillance, I have already told.
I have also told you that the first years of my captivity were full of anxiety and brooding. I never managed to get any actual information about the fate of the Chemical City, but little by little I calculated what plan the enemy had followed. The intention must have been to gas the streets and prevent all air supply to the lower parts of the city, until the inhabitants in desperation would sneak up through the few remaining exits, one by one or in small crowds, and surrender to the enemy's guard. How long the oxygen tanks inside the city could last and whether the courage of the population was such that it preferred death to surrender, or vice versa, I knew not. It was also conceivable that the entire siege failed, that help arrived from other parts of the World State. As I said, I was never told. But in any case there was a possibility that Linda was alive. Maybe also Rissen, if they haven't had time to execute him yet. I admit that it is an improbable fantasy, and were I to question my sanity, I should surely spend the rest of my life in despair. Now that I don't do it, maybe it just shows that my self-preservation drives me to seek solace in illusion. Rissen himself said before he was sentenced: "I know that what I am leads somewhere." I'm not sure what he meant. But it happens to me, as I sit on my bunk with my eyes closed, that I manage to see the stars twinkling and hear the wind whistling like that night, and I can't, I can't eradicate it the illusion from my soul, that I am still, despite everything, helping to create a new world. if they haven't had time to execute him yet. I admit that it is an improbable fantasy, and were I to question my sanity, I should surely spend the rest of my life in despair. Now that I don't do it, maybe it just shows that my self-preservation drives me to seek solace in illusion. Rissen himself said before he was sentenced: "I know that what I am leads somewhere." I'm not sure what he meant. But it happens to me, as I sit on my bunk with my eyes closed, that I manage to see the stars twinkling and hear the wind whistling like that night, and I can't, I can't eradicate it the illusion from my soul, that I am still, despite everything, helping to create a new world. if they haven't had time to execute him yet. I admit that it is an improbable fantasy, and were I to question my sanity, I should surely spend the rest of my life in despair. Now that I don't do it, maybe it just shows that my self-preservation drives me to seek solace in illusion. Rissen himself said before he was sentenced: "I know that what I am leads somewhere." I'm not sure what he meant. But it happens to me, as I sit on my bunk with my eyes closed, that I manage to see the stars twinkling and hear the wind whistling like that night, and I can't, I can't eradicate it the illusion from my soul, that I am still, despite everything, helping to create a new world. should I surely spend the rest of my life in despair. Now that I don't do it, maybe it just shows that my self-preservation drives me to seek solace in illusion. Rissen himself said before he was sentenced: "I know that what I am leads somewhere." I'm not sure what he meant. But it happens to me, as I sit on my bunk with my eyes closed, that I manage to see the stars twinkling and hear the wind whistling like that night, and I can't, I can't eradicate it the illusion from my soul, that I am still, despite everything, helping to create a new world. should I surely spend the rest of my life in despair. Now that I don't do it, maybe it just shows that my self-preservation drives me to seek solace in illusion. Rissen himself said before he was sentenced: "I know that what I am leads somewhere." I'm not sure what he meant. But it happens to me, as I sit on my bunk with my eyes closed, that I manage to see the stars twinkling and hear the wind whistling like that night, and I can't, I can't eradicate it the illusion from my soul, that I am still, despite everything, helping to create a new world. I'm not sure what he meant. But it happens to me, as I sit on my bunk with my eyes closed, that I manage to see the stars twinkling and hear the wind whistling like that night, and I can't, I can't eradicate it the illusion from my soul, that I am still, despite everything, helping to create a new world. I'm not sure what he meant. But it happens to me, as I sit on my bunk with my eyes closed, that I manage to see the stars twinkling and hear the wind whistling like that night, and I can't, I can't eradicate it the illusion from my soul, that I am still, despite everything, helping to create a new world.